SOURCE: https://caanet.org/compliance-reminder-section-8-acceptance-and-criminal-background-checks-are-fair-housing-issues/
RETRIEVED: 2026-10-03 (fetched by Proofline; link-only in official manifest)
SHA256: 8d99c3f34a51b28a170f39ea69500edc97d7b950391320a59f36898a8320b350

Compliance reminder: Section 8 acceptance and criminal background checks are fair housing issues • California Apartment Association

 Skip to main content

 CAA › News › Application and Screening › Compliance reminder: Section 8 acceptance and criminal background checks are fair housing issues 

The California Apartment Association urges its members to review their tenant-screening policies to ensure compliance with fair housing rule changes regarding housing vouchers and criminal history information.

CAA’s recommendation comes amid a recent uptick in investigations for violations of fair housing rules at the local, state and national level — specifically those around criminal background checks in the tenant screening process and “No Section 8” policies.

Criminal background check limitations

While landlords are not entirely prohibited from checking the criminal history of an applicant, fair housing regulations place strict limitations on such policies. The use of criminal history information posing fair housing issues has been a growing concern since 2016, when the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) issued guidance identifying the practice as potentially having a disparate impact on members of certain protected classes, due to the disproportionate number of racial minorities and persons with disabilities involved in the criminal justice system. In 2019, California’s Civil Rights Council (formerly the Fair Employment and Housing Council) enacted regulations that took effect Jan. 1, 2020, which built on the HUD guidance and specifically address the use of criminal history information in housing decisions.  

Resources

Industry Insight: Overview of the Section 8 Housing Choice Voucher Program

Industry Insight: Screening: Establishing Criteria

CRD Fact Sheet on Criminal Background Checks

CRD Fact Sheet on Source of Income Discrimination 

The California regulations include limits on what type of criminal history may be sought, how an applicant’s criminal history can be considered, and what actions a landlord may take based on an applicant’s criminal history. Blanket bans on applicants with a criminal record are prohibited, as are policies that consider arrests without convictions.

Given the complex nature of the California regulations, CAA recommends landlords not conduct criminal background checks without developing appropriate screening criteria and procedures with a knowledgeable fair housing attorney. In line with this guidance, CAA’s Application to Rent form is not designed for criminal background checks. Landlords who wish to consider criminal history information should consult with a fair housing attorney and their screening provider to ensure all forms and processes comply with the law.

Reminder that “No Section 8” policies are against the law

Several amendments in recent years to state fair housing laws also provide enhanced protections for renters that use rental assistance programs to help renters afford housing, such as the Section 8 Housing Choice Voucher program.

In 2019, the California Legislature adopted SB 329, which updated the definition of “source of income” used in the Fair Employment and Housing Act (FEHA) to include government housing subsidy programs, such as Section 8. This change meant that, as of Jan. 1, 2020, state law prohibits landlords from refusing to participate in such programs. Despite being the law since January 2020, some landlords continue to have “No Section 8” policies in place, and the California Civil Rights Department (CRD) is cracking down on violators. Case in point,  the CRD announced last week that it had filed a lawsuit against an offending landlord in an effort to prevent future unlawful refusals to accept Section 8 vouchers.

In addition, last year’s SB 267 amended FEHA to prohibit rental property owners from using a person’s credit history as part of the application process – if they have a government rental subsidy, such as Section 8 — without offering the applicant the option to provide alternative evidence of a verifiable legal means to pay their portion of the rent.

CAA encourages its members to review their screening processes to ensure compliance with these fair housing rules.

 View comments (0)

 Hide comments

 Leave a comment

This resource contains member-only content

CAA members have access to compliance forms, educational tools, and extended news resources related to this topic.

Sign in

Join Now

Popular Topics

Rent Control

AB-1482

Security Deposits

Application and Screening

Just Cause

All Topics 

Latest News

Governor signs bill expanding emergency rent caps to long-term leasesOctober 1, 2026

Helpline Highlight: Regaining possession when tenant appears to have abandoned unitSeptember 30, 2026

New law will require disclosures for digitally altered rental adsSeptember 29, 2026

All News 

Featured Webinars

Security Deposits Ins and Outs Webinar Rebroadcast

California’s law governing security deposits in residential rental housing can be strict and disputes over security deposits are common. The law has been amended multiple times in the past several years, meaning that it’s more important than ever to make sure you are up to date on the latest requirements. This webinar rebroadcast will cover… 

Why Is My Eviction Taking So Long? A Behind-the-Scenes Look at Unlawful Detainers

An unlawful detainer action is more than filing paperwork and getting a rubber stamp from the court system. Once a termination notice expires and a resident does not move out, the matter becomes a civil lawsuit governed by strict procedural rules, evidentiary requirements, and court deadlines. While unlawful detainers are intended to move more quickly… 

California Fair Housing in a Nutshell Rebroadcast

California’s fair housing laws are among the most comprehensive in the country, and they apply to nearly all residential rental properties in the state. Because California law goes beyond federal requirements — and continues to evolve — understanding state-specific rules is critical to avoiding legal risk. These laws are not always straightforward, and even well-intentioned… 

Latest News

Governor signs bill expanding emergency rent caps to long-term leases

October 1, 2026

Helpline Highlight: Regaining possession when tenant appears to have abandoned unit

September 30, 2026

New law will require disclosures for digitally altered rental ads

September 29, 2026
