SOURCE: https://www.cambridgeday.com/?p=158097
RETRIEVED: 2026-10-03 (fetched by Proofline; link-only in official manifest)
SHA256: 09eb47d036f0b9a11b67233cfc76cc2430c7561b0e0bdc51c302ed9318b52e90

City Council tries to ground AirBNB, rental algorithms - Cambridge Day

 Close 

 Search for:

 Search 

 Close 

 Skip to content

 Jivan Sobrinho-Wheeler in a city council meeting earlier this year. Credit: Bruno Muñoz-Oropeza

City Council on Monday took aim at two kinds of technology it thinks has caused upward pressure on rent, one being short-term rental platforms, the other pricing algorithms used by large residential property owners. The council accepted a new ordinance petition intended to crack down on unregistered short-term rentals advertised on booking companies like AirBnb and VRBO. If approved, city law would require the booking companies themselves to register with the city of Cambridge and administer financial penalties if they connect a user with an unregistered unit.

Owners of short-term rental units have been required to register their properties with the city since it passed a Short-Term Rental Zoning Ordinance in 2017. But the Department of Inspectional Services estimates less than a third of all short-term rentals are in compliance. Currently, 216 are registered while another estimated 500 are operating illegally in the city. 

This new policy comes during a period of friction between rental companies and municipalities, which see the companies as depleting housing stock that could be purchased or rented. Cities like New York and San Francisco have put strict laws governing short-term rentals in place in an effort to combat their housing shortages.

“The broad goal of this is to try to make sure that housing is used as a place for residents to live in year-round,” said Councillor Jivan Sobrinho-Wheeler, who worked with Councillor Patty Nolan to develop the new ordinance language.

“There are exceptions if you have an extra room in your house that you have to let out. But if there’s a whole other unit, that should be housing, and visitors for the most part should stay in hotels.”

According to the new ordinance language, booking companies that earn fees from listing unregistered rentals could face a fine of $300 per day per violation. It also limits the length of stay in short term rentals to 90 days.

The petition was unanimously passed to a second reading with the Ordinance Committee.

Algorithmic price fixing

City council also unanimously passed a policy order initiating steps to ban residential property management companies from contracting companies that use algorithmic and AI-driven models to recommend what they should charge for rent. Councillors say that by using these services, managers are able to collude with one another through a third party in order to inflate rents in what amounts to illegal price fixing.

“Price fixing is a practice as a practice has been illegal for a long time due to antitrust laws that go back decades,” said Sobrinho-Wheeler, the policy order’s lead sponsor. “Corporate management companies for rental units by using algorithmic price fixing software to turn over their rental data to a third party and say, ‘Hey, we’re not talking to each other. We’re just talking to this third company and sharing with them all of our data, and then that company is telling us how to price our units, and coincidentally pricing them quite high.’”

Sobrinho-Wheeler confirmed that this type of software is actively being used by property managers in Cambridge.

This policy order comes four years after a report published by ProPublica revealed that in some areas of the country, users of YieldStar from the company RealPage increased rents by far more than comparable units. Under President Biden, the U.S. Department of Justice pursued an antitrust case against the company, which was settled in late 2025 under the Trump administration. The company agreed to remove nonpublic, competitively sensitive information from its model but admitted no wrongdoing and paid no financial penalty.

“If federal law was being enforced properly, this could already be banned nationwide,” Sobrinho-Wheeler said. “The reason that it hasn’t is because antitrust law has been really gutted at the federal level by President Trump.”

Cambridge joins cities like Berkeley, Calif. and Providence, R.I., that are trying to take matters into their own hands by enacting bans. Bills banning the practice in the rental market are also working their way through the Massachusetts state House and Senate.

The policy order directs the city manager work with relevant city departments to draft policy options or ordinance language that will be presented back to council later this term.

Support our work

As a nonprofit, community-based independent publication, we rely on contributions from readers like you to fund our journalism.

Like this:
Like Loading…

Related Stories

A stronger

Please consider making a financial contribution to maintain, expand and improve Cambridge Day.

We are now a 501(c)(3) nonprofit and all donations are tax deductible.

Please consider a recurring contribution.

Donate now

 Join the Conversation 

 2 Comments

We should be clear, RealPage has already settled with the federal government and can no longer be used in this way. 

https://www.propublica.org/article/doj-realpage-settlement-rental-price-fixing-case 

Large property managers have also settled with Attorney General Campbell and agreed not to do so either. 

https://www.mass.gov/news/ag-campbell-reaches-7-million-multistate-settlement-with-nations-largest-landlord-for-anticompetitive-algorithmic-pricing-scheme-that-harms-renters

A local ban may prevent others from trying to do this in the future. But it won’t have any impact on current Cambridge rents.

The City Council, for nearly 10 years, has failed to enforce a city ordinance regarding short term rentals. An estimated 500 rental apartments are being used for short term profit rather than long term housing. Registration of apartments happens less than a third of the time. What are the statistics regarding fines and enforcement? Is this latest feeble effort going to be any different?

 Leave a comment

You must be logged in to post a comment. 

Leave a comment

A stronger Cambridge Day

Please consider making a financial contribution to maintain, expand and improve Cambridge Day.

We are now a 501(c)(3) nonprofit and all donations are tax deductible.

Please consider a recurring contribution.

Donate now

 RECENT

Community, developers have mixed response to new inclusionary options 
Some housing advocates and builders panned the report entirely, while others found merit in some suggestions.

Like this:
Like Loading… 

 by Jane Petersen 
 Friday, October 2, 2026Saturday, October 3, 2026 

Inquest finds Cambridge officers justified in fatal shooting 
Officers acted “reasonably” to the situation that left a man dead, according to results released Friday by the district attorney.

Like this:
Like Loading… 

 by Nathan Metcalf and Ruth Tam 
 Friday, October 2, 2026Friday, October 2, 2026 

‘Verity’is lifeless on page and on screen 
The movie version of Colleen Hoover’s novel puts an all-star cast in a lame melodrama. 

Like this:
Like Loading… 

 by Tom Meek 
 Friday, October 2, 2026Saturday, October 3, 2026 

Support our work

As an independent publication, we rely on contributions from readers like you to fund our journalism.

Stay in the know

Sign up to our free newsletter to get the latest news delivered straight to your inbox.

Join our community for free. Sign up now.

Register today to stay up-to-date with the latest news.

 Continue with Google 

 Or 

 Sign up

Thank you for registering!

Sign in or register

 Close

 Continue with Google 

 Or 

 Enter the code sent to your email

 Email address

 Enter your password

 Sign in by entering the code we sent to , or clicking the magic link in the email. 

 Continue
 Resend code
 Email me a one-time code instead
 Forgot password
 Go back

 Continue
 Set a password (optional)

 We'll send a verification code to %EMAIL%. 

 Send code 

 Skip for now 

 Link

 Copy link 

%d
