SOURCE: https://cityclerk.lacity.org/onlinedocs/2018/18-0462_ord_draft_06-06-2019.pdf
NOTE: The manifest lists D038 as the Los Angeles Municipal Code page for this article on codelibrary.amlegal.com, which blocks automated access. This is the text of the same Article 5.6.1 (LAMC Secs. 45.65 to 45.69, source of income) from the City Clerk's council file 18-0462, as transmitted for adoption on 2019-06-06. The article is codified in the Los Angeles Municipal Code today.
RETRIEVED: 2026-10-04 (fetched by Proofline; link-only in official manifest)
SHA256: 175e82d966a0c8861647c2a2623c3b1656ce4f8825f0165b80baaa4bedd2e1c9

ORDINANCE NO.
An  ordinance adding Article 5.6.1 to Chapter IV of the Los Angeles Municipal 
Code to protect affordable housing opportunities for persons using rental assistance 
and other sources of income, such as Section 8 vouchers, as payment for rent.
WHEREAS, the City of Los Angeles is committed to protecting desperately 
needed affordable housing for all segments of the community, in particular for its most 
vulnerable residents including those using rental assistance or other sources of income 
as payment for rent;
WHEREAS, recent reports reveal a shortage of landlords participating in the 
Housing Authority of the City of Los Angeles’s Section 8 rental subsidy program, which 
may  reflect discrimination against Section 8 voucher holders and those persons 
receiving other forms of rental assistance;
WHEREAS, such discrimination may  significantly limit the pool of housing 
available to persons receiving such assistance;
WHEREAS, both state and federal law require the City to identify impediments to 
providing affordable and accessible housing and to develop strategies for removing 
such impediments; and
WHEREAS, to fulfill its commitment to providing affordable housing opportunities 
and obligations as required by law, it is necessary to protect affordable housing 
opportunities for persons using rental assistance or other sources of payment for rent.
NOW, THEREFORE,
THE PEOPLE OF THE CITY OF LOS ANGELES 
DO ORDAIN AS FOLLOWS:
Section 1. Article 5.6.1 is added to Chapter IV of the Los Angeles Municipal Code 
to read as follows:
ARTICLE 5.6.1
PROTECTING AFFORDABLE HOUSING OPPORTUNITIES FOR PERSONS USING 
RENTAL ASSISTANCE OR OTHER SOURCES OF INCOME AS PAYMENT
SEC. 45.65. FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
The City Council finds and declares:
Housing is a fundamental necessity of life. Housing plays a major role in defining 
quality of life, security, connection to community, and access to opportunity. In
1


recognition of this, Objective 3.1 of the City’s Housing Element of its General Plan 
requires the City to ensure that housing opportunities are accessible to all residents 
without discrimination on the basis of race, ancestry, sex, national origin, color, religion, 
sexual orientation, marital status, familial status, age, disability (including HIV/AIDS), 
and student status.
The Housing Authority of the City of Los Angeles reports a shortage of landlords 
participating in its Section 8 rental subsidy program. At present, only 53%  of Section 8 
voucher holders are successful in finding a unit due to what is believed to be a 
combination of factors including discrimination against Section 8 voucher holders, low 
vacancy rates, and the high cost of housing. These findings are consistent with a study 
conducted on behalf of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, which 
found that 76.4%  of landlords in the City contacted by phone in response to 
advertisements for rental units responded that they did not accept Section 8 vouchers. 
The average denial rate was 81.5% in low-poverty areas, 80.7% in medium  poverty 
areas, and 66%  in high poverty areas. Such rates were lower in jurisdictions with local 
laws against voucher discrimination as compared to those without such protections. 
These findings suggest that local laws that prohibit discrimination based upon source of 
income increase landlords’ participation in Section 8 rental subsidy programs.
To further Objective 3.1 of the City’s General Plan and to address the local 
housing crisis created by some  landlords’ lack of participation in the Section 8 rental 
subsidy program, this article prohibits discrimination based upon a person’s use of 
rental assistance or other sources of income as payment for rent.
SEC. 45.66. DEFINITIONS.
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this article, shall be 
construed as defined in this section. Words and phrases not defined herein shall be 
construed as defined in Section 12.03 of this Code, if defined therein.
Housing Accommodation. All dwelling units, efficiency dwelling 
units, guest rooms, and suites, as defined in Section 12.03 of this Code; all 
housing accommodations as defined in Government  Code Section 12927; and 
duplexes, condominiums, and single family residences in the City of Los 
Angeles, rented or offered for rent for living or dwelling purposes, the land and 
buildings appurtenant thereto, and all housing services, utilities, privileges, 
furnishings and facilities supplied in connection with the use or occupancy 
thereof, including garage and parking facilities. This term shall also include 
mobile homes,  whether rent is paid for the mobile home  and the land upon which 
the mobile home  is located or for the land alone.
A.
Person. Any natural person, firm, association, partnership, limited 
partnership, organization, entity, business, trust, limited liability company,  joint 
venture, corporation, estate, or trust, and any agent or employee thereof.
B.
City. The City of Los Angeles.C.
2


Source of Income. Any lawful source of income, rental 
assistance, subsidy, or financial aid from any person, including but not limited to 
a federal, state or local government, or non-profit or charitable agency, whether 
paid directly to the program participant, landlord or his or her representative, 
including but not limited to the Section 8 voucher program, the Los Angeles 
Homeless Services Authority’s Rapid Re-Housing program or any other housing 
subsidy program, homeless assistance or prevention program or security deposit 
assistance program.
D.
SEC. 45.67. PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
It shall be unlawful for any person offering for rent, renting, or listing any housing 
accommodation to do or attempt to do any of the following:
Based upon a person’s source of income, refuse to rent or lease, or 
to continue to rent or lease, a housing accommodation; refuse to enter into or 
renew a rental agreement, lease or housing assistance payment contract; refuse 
to execute any documents required to enter into or renew a rental agreement, 
lease or housing assistance payment contract; serve a notice of termination of 
tenancy; seek to terminate or terminate a tenancy; or otherwise deny or withhold 
a housing accommodation or housing services or amenities.
A.
Apply different terms, conditions, restrictions, or privileges, based 
upon a person’s source of income, in connection with the rental of a housing 
accommodation, including but not limited to the setting of rates for rental or 
lease, the establishment of damage  deposits or other similar financial conditions, 
or refuse access to or use of the common  area or facilities associated with a 
housing accommodation or refuse to make  repairs or improvements to a housing 
accommodation or real property associated with a housing accommodation.
B.
Represent to any person based upon their source of income that a 
housing accommodation is unavailable for viewing for rental when  such housing 
accommodation is available for rent.
C.
Make,  print, or publish, or cause to be made,  printed, or published 
through any medium,  any notice, statement, sign, advertisement, application, or 
contract, with regard to any housing accommodation offered for rent, including 
but not limited to the accepted form(s) of payment for the housing 
accommodation, that indicates any preference, limitation, or discrimination based 
upon a person’s source of income.
D.
SEC. 45.68. REMEDIES.
Civil Liability. An  aggrieved person may  bring a civil action for injunctive 
relief and damages. The court may  award to the person whose rights are violated 
punitive damages  in an amount no less than three times the amount of actual damages
A.
3


or three times the amount of one month’s rent that the landlord charges for the housing 
accommodation at issue, whichever is higher. The court may  also award reasonable 
attorney fees and costs of the action.
Affirmative Defense. Any person may  assert a violation of this article as 
an affirmative defense to an unlawful detainer action brought pursuant to California 
Code of Civil Procedure Section 1161, as amended.
B.
Nonexclusive Remedies and Penalties. The remedies provided in this 
article are not exclusive, and nothing in this article shall preclude an aggrieved person 
from seeking any other remedies provided by law.
C.
SEC. 45.69. EFFECTIVE DATE.
The provisions of this ordinance shall take effect on January 1,2020.
Sec. 2. Severability. If any provision of this ordinance is found to be 
unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, that invalidity 
shall not affect the remaining provisions of this ordinance which can be implemented 
without the invalid provisions, and to this end, the provisions of this ordinance are 
declared to be severable. The City Council hereby declares that it would have adopted 
this ordinance and each provision thereof irrespective of whether any one or more 
provisions are found invalid, unconstitutional or otherwise unenforceable.
4


Sec. 3. The City Clerk shall certify to the passage of this ordinance and have it 
published in accordance with Council policy, either in a daily newspaper circulated in 
the City of Los Angeles or by posting for ten days in three public places in the City of 
Los Angeles: one copy on the bulletin board located at the Main Street entrance to the 
Los Angeles City Hall; one copy on the bulletin board located at the Main Street 
entrance to the Los Angeles City Hall East; and one copy on the bulletin board located 
at the Temple Street entrance to the Los Angeles County Hall of Records.
Approved as to Form and Legality
MICHAEL  N. FEUER,  City Attorney
C-fiBy
MEI MEI CHENG  
Deputy City Attorney
2&i  3Date
18-0462File No.
m:\housing\hcid\cheng\source of income\final- source of income ordinance ■ 6-6-19.docx
The Clerk of the City of Los Angeles 
hereby certifies that the foregoing 
ordinance was passed by the Council 
of the City of Los Angeles.
MAYORCITY CLERK
ApprovedOrdinance Passed

