SOURCE: https://daypitney.com/new-jersey-enacts-fair-act-to-prohibit-algorithmic-rent-setting-practices
RETRIEVED: 2026-10-03 (fetched by Proofline; link-only in official manifest)
SHA256: efe1b8903a332d8b4909bac8ddefbfc5181d88b5117668d265c49c90b6512f0c

New Jersey Enacts FAIR Act to Prohibit Algorithmic Rent-Setting Practices | Day Pitney

 Skip to Main Content

Insights

News

 Publisher:
 Day Pitney Alert

 July 31, 2026

New Jersey Enacts FAIR Act to Prohibit Algorithmic Rent-Setting Practices

 Share to Facebook

 Share to X

 Share to LinkedIn

 Share via Email

 PDF Download (opens in a new tab)

On July 20, Governor Mikie Sherrill signed into law P.L. 2026, c. 43, the Forbidding the Algorithmic Inflation of Rent (FAIR) Act. The legislation is part of the administration's broader effort to make New Jersey more affordable by ensuring the housing market is fair and competitive. The FAIR Act prohibits residential rental property owners from using algorithmic revenue management software that collects or processes competitors' nonpublic leasing information to set or recommend rental prices. It also prohibits software providers and other "coordinators" from using such software to facilitate agreements or coordinate pricing among competing residential landlords. A "coordinator" is broadly defined to include any person operating algorithmic revenue management software or an algorithmic device that uses nonpublic, competitively sensitive information from multiple residential rental property owners to generate algorithmic recommendations regarding rental prices, lease terms, or occupancy levels. The act does not prohibit the use of certain technologies, including spreadsheets requiring human analysis, publicly available rent estimation tools, traditional real estate listing databases, and government-administered affordable housing programs.

The FAIR Act requires the attorney general to establish a complaint portal on the Department of Law and Public Safety's website for alleged violations and preserves existing remedies under the New Jersey Antitrust Act. Residential rental property owners, property managers, and software providers should review their pricing practices, technology platforms, and vendor relationships to ensure compliance with the new law.

The FAIR Act takes effect on July 1, 2027, providing affected property owners, managers, and software providers time to review and, if necessary, modify their pricing practices before the law becomes effective.

 +Expand More Information

Related Practices and Industries

 Commercial Real Estate

 Residential Real Estate

Contacts

 Katharine A. Coffey

 Partner

 Parsippany,
 NJ

 |
 (973) 966-8323

 kcoffey@daypitney.com

 Peter J. Wolfson

 Partner

 Parsippany,
 NJ

 |
 (973) 966-8298

 pwolfson@daypitney.com

 Carly M. Clinton

 Associate

 Parsippany,
 NJ

 |
 (973) 966-8123

 cclinton@daypitney.com

 Explore Day Pitney's latest media mentions and speaking appearances.

 View All In The Media

 Press Contact

 Elyse Blazey Gentile

 Director of Communications

 973.966.8092

 |

 egentile@daypitney.com

 EMAIL DISCLAIMER

Thank you for your interest in contacting us by email. 

 Your e-mail to this individual should not contain any confidential information and should be for general information purposes only. An attorney-client relationship will not be created by your e-mail to this individual. Information in your e-mail may not be entitled to any protections commonly associated with communications with attorneys. If you are in doubt about any information, please exclude it.

 If you accept the terms of this notice and would like to send an email, click on the "I Agree" button below.
 Otherwise, please click "I Don't Agree".

 I Agree
 I Don't Agree
