SOURCE: https://law.justia.com/codes/new-jersey/title-2a/section-2a-18-61-1/
RETRIEVED: 2026-10-03 (fetched by Proofline; link-only in official manifest)
SHA256: 057538cc1de020ed5043805a806eff927c7a4e594f6354ed5857dd2fd2230f30


 New Jersey Revised Statutes Section 2A:18-61.1 (2025) - Grounds for removal of tenants. :: 2025 New Jersey Revised Statutes :: U.S. Codes and Statutes :: U.S. Law :: Justia 
 Log In
 Sign Up
 Find a Lawyer
 Ask a Lawyer 
 Research the Law
 Law Schools
 Laws & Regs
 Newsletters
 Marketing Solutions
 Justia Connect
 Pro Membership
 Practice Membership
 Public Membership
 Justia Lawyer Directory
 Platinum Placements
 Gold Placements
 Justia Elevate
 SEO
 Websites
 Blogs
 Justia Amplify
 PPC Management
 Google Business Profile
 Social Media
 Justia Onward Blog
 Justia
 › 
 U.S. Law
 › 
 U.S. Codes and Statutes
 › 
 New Jersey Revised Statutes
 › 
 2025 New Jersey Revised Statutes
 › 
 Title 2A - Administration of Civil and Criminal Justice
 › 
 Section 2A:18-61.1 - Grounds for removal of tenants.
 Go to Previous Versions
 of
 this Section
 2025 N.J. Rev. Stat. (here)
 2024 N.J. Rev. Stat.
 2023 N.J. Rev. Stat.
 View All Versions
 2025 New Jersey Revised Statutes
Title 2A - Administration of Civil and Criminal Justice
Section 2A:18-61.1 - Grounds for removal of tenants.
 Universal Citation:
 NJ Rev Stat § 2A:18-61.1 (2025)
 Learn more
 This media-neutral citation is based
 on the American Association of Law Libraries Universal Citation Guide and is not
 necessarily the official citation.
 Previous
 Next
 2A:18-61.1 Grounds for removal of tenants. 
 2. No lessee or tenant or the assigns, under-tenants or legal representatives of such lessee or tenant may be removed by the Superior Court from any house, building, mobile home or land in a mobile home park or tenement leased for residential purposes, other than (1) owner-occupied premises with not more than two rental units or a hotel, motel or other guest house or part thereof rented to a transient guest or seasonal tenant; (2) a dwelling unit which is held in trust on behalf of a member of the immediate family of the person or persons establishing the trust, provided that the member of the immediate family on whose behalf the trust is established permanently occupies the unit; and (3) a dwelling unit which is permanently occupied by a member of the immediate family of the owner of that unit, provided, however, that exception (2) or (3) shall apply only in cases in which the member of the immediate family has a developmental disability, except upon establishment of one of the following grounds as good cause:
 a. The person fails to pay rent due and owing under the lease whether the same be oral or written; provided that, for the purposes of this section, any portion of rent unpaid by a tenant to a landlord but utilized by the tenant to continue utility service to the rental premises after receiving notice from an electric, gas, water or sewer public utility that such service was in danger of discontinuance based on nonpayment by the landlord, shall not be deemed to be unpaid rent.
 b. The person has continued to be, after written notice to cease, so disorderly as to destroy the peace and quiet of the occupants or other tenants living in said house or neighborhood.
 c. The person has willfully or by reason of gross negligence caused or allowed destruction, damage or injury to the premises.
 d. The person has continued, after written notice to cease, to substantially violate or breach any of the landlord's rules and regulations governing said premises, provided such rules and regulations are reasonable and have been accepted in writing by the tenant or made a part of the lease at the beginning of the lease term.
 e. (1) The person has continued, after written notice to cease, to substantially violate or breach any of the covenants or agreements contained in the lease for the premises where a right of reentry is reserved to the landlord in the lease for a violation of such covenant or agreement, provided that such covenant or agreement is reasonable and was contained in the lease at the beginning of the lease term.
 (2) In public housing under the control of a public housing authority or redevelopment agency, the person has substantially violated or breached any of the covenants or agreements contained in the lease for the premises pertaining to illegal uses of controlled dangerous substances, or other illegal activities, whether or not a right of reentry is reserved to the landlord in the lease for a violation of such covenant or agreement, provided that such covenant or agreement conforms to federal guidelines regarding such lease provisions and was contained in the lease at the beginning of the lease term.
 f. The person has failed to pay rent after a valid notice to quit and notice of increase of said rent, provided the increase in rent is not unconscionable and complies with any and all other laws or municipal ordinances governing rent increases.
 g. The landlord or owner (1) seeks to permanently board up or demolish the premises because he has been cited by local or State housing inspectors for substantial violations affecting the health and safety of tenants and it is economically unfeasible for the owner to eliminate the violations; (2) seeks to comply with local or State housing inspectors who have cited him for substantial violations affecting the health and safety of tenants and it is unfeasible to so comply without removing the tenant; simultaneously with service of notice of eviction pursuant to this clause, the landlord shall notify the Department of Community Affairs of the intention to institute proceedings and shall provide the department with such other information as it may require pursuant to rules and regulations. The department shall inform all parties and the court of its view with respect to the feasibility of compliance without removal of the tenant and may in its discretion appear and present evidence; (3) seeks to correct an illegal occupancy because he has been cited by local or State housing inspectors or zoning officers and it is unfeasible to correct such illegal occupancy without removing the tenant; or (4) is a governmental agency which seeks to permanently retire the premises from the rental market pursuant to a redevelopment or land clearance plan in a blighted area. In those cases where the tenant is being removed for any reason specified in this subsection, no warrant for possession shall be issued until P.L.1967, c.79 (C.52:31B-1 et seq.) and P.L.1971, c.362 (C.20:4-1 et seq.) have been complied with.
 h. The owner seeks to retire permanently the residential building or the mobile home park from residential use or use as a mobile home park, provided this subsection shall not apply to circumstances covered under subsection g. of this section.
 i. The landlord or owner proposes, at the termination of a lease, reasonable changes of substance in the terms and conditions of the lease, including specifically any change in the term thereof, which the tenant, after written notice, refuses to accept; provided that in cases where a tenant has received a notice of termination pursuant to subsection g. of section 3 of P.L.1974, c.49 (C.2A:18-61.2), or has a protected tenancy status pursuant to the "Senior Citizens and Disabled Protected Tenancy Act," P.L.1981, c.226 (C.2A:18-61.22 et al.), or pursuant to the "Tenant Protection Act of 1992," P.L.1991, c.509 (C.2A:18-61.40 et al.), the landlord or owner shall have the burden of proving that any change in the terms and conditions of the lease, rental or regulations both is reasonable and does not substantially reduce the rights and privileges to which the tenant was entitled prior to the conversion.
 j. The person, after written notice to cease, has habitually and without legal justification failed to pay rent which is due and owing.
 k. The landlord or owner of the building or mobile home park is converting from the rental market to a condominium, cooperative or fee simple ownership of two or more dwelling units or park sites, except as hereinafter provided in subsection l. of this section. Where the tenant is being removed pursuant to this subsection, no warrant for possession shall be issued until this act has been complied with. No action for possession shall be brought pursuant to this subsection against a senior citizen tenant or disabled tenant with protected tenancy status pursuant to the "Senior Citizens and Disabled Protected Tenancy Act," P.L.1981, c.226 (C.2A:18-61.22 et al.), or against a qualified tenant under the "Tenant Protection Act of 1992," P.L.1991, c.509 (C.2A:18-61.40 et al.), as long as the agency has not terminated the protected tenancy status or the protected tenancy period has not expired.
 l. (1) The owner of a building or mobile home park, which is constructed as or being converted to a condominium, cooperative or fee simple ownership, seeks to evict a tenant or sublessee whose initial tenancy began after the master deed, agreement establishing the cooperative or subdivision plat was recorded, because the owner has contracted to sell the unit to a buyer who seeks to personally occupy it and the contract for sale calls for the unit to be vacant at the time of closing. However, no action shall be brought against a tenant under paragraph (1) of this subsection unless the tenant was given a statement in accordance with section 6 of P.L.1975, c.311 (C.2A:18-61.9);
 (2) The owner of three or less condominium or cooperative units seeks to evict a tenant whose initial tenancy began by rental from an owner of three or less units after the master deed or agreement establishing the cooperative was recorded, because the owner seeks to personally occupy the unit, or has contracted to sell the unit to a buyer who seeks to personally occupy it and the contract for sale calls for the unit to be vacant at the time of closing;
 (3) The owner of a building of three residential units or less seeks to personally occupy a unit, or has contracted to sell the residential unit to a buyer who wishes to personally occupy it and the contract for sale calls for the unit to be vacant at the time of closing.
 m. The landlord or owner conditioned the tenancy upon and in consideration for the tenant's employment by the landlord or owner as superintendent, janitor or in some other capacity and such employment is being terminated.
 n. The person has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to, or if a juvenile, has been adjudicated delinquent on the basis of an act which if committed by an adult would constitute an offense under the "Comprehensive Drug Reform Act of 1987," N.J.S.2C:35-1 et al., involving the use, possession, manufacture, dispensing or distribution of a controlled dangerous substance, controlled dangerous substance analog or drug paraphernalia within the meaning of that act within or upon the leased premises or the building or complex of buildings and land appurtenant thereto, or the mobile home park, in which those premises are located, and has not in connection with his sentence for that offense either (1) successfully completed or (2) been admitted to and continued upon probation while completing, a drug rehabilitation program pursuant to N.J.S.2C:35-14; or, being the tenant or lessee of such leased premises, knowingly harbors or harbored therein a person who has been so convicted or has so pleaded, or otherwise permits or permitted such a person to occupy those premises for residential purposes, whether continuously or intermittently, except that this subsection shall not apply to a person harboring or permitting a juvenile to occupy the premises if the juvenile has been adjudicated delinquent upon the basis of an act which if committed by an adult would constitute the offense of use or possession under the said act. No action for removal may be brought pursuant to this subsection more than two years after the date of the adjudication or conviction or more than two years after the person's release from incarceration whichever is the later.
 o. The person has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to, or if a juvenile, has been adjudicated delinquent on the basis of an act which if committed by an adult would constitute an offense under N.J.S.2C:12-1 or N.J.S.2C:12-3 involving assault, or terroristic threats against the landlord, a member of the landlord's family or an employee of the landlord; or, being the tenant or lessee of such leased premises, knowingly harbors or harbored therein a person who has been so convicted or has so pleaded, or otherwise permits or permitted such a person to occupy those premises for residential purposes, whether continuously or intermittently. No action for removal may be brought pursuant to this subsection more than two years after the adjudication or conviction or more than two years after the person's release from incarceration whichever is the later.
 p. The person has been found, by a preponderance of the evidence, liable in a civil action for removal commenced under this act for an offense under N.J.S.2C:20-1 et al. involving theft of property located on the leased premises from the landlord, the leased premises or other tenants residing in the leased premises, or N.J.S.2C:12-1 or N.J.S.2C:12-3 involving assault or terroristic threats against the landlord, a member of the landlord's family or an employee of the landlord, or under the "Comprehensive Drug Reform Act of 1987," N.J.S.2C:35-1 et al., involving the use, possession, manufacture, dispensing or distribution of a controlled dangerous substance, controlled dangerous substance analog or drug paraphernalia within the meaning of that act within or upon the leased premises or the building or complex of buildings and land appurtenant thereto, or the mobile home park, in which those premises are located, and has not in connection with his sentence for that offense either (1) successfully completed or (2) been admitted to and continued upon probation while completing a drug rehabilitation program pursuant to N.J.S.2C:35-14; or, being the tenant or lessee of such leased premises, knowingly harbors or harbored therein a person who committed such an offense, or otherwise permits or permitted such a person to occupy those premises for residential purposes, whether continuously or intermittently, except that this subsection shall not apply to a person who harbors or permits a juvenile to occupy the premises if the juvenile has been adjudicated delinquent upon the basis of an act which if committed by an adult would constitute the offense of use or possession under the said "Comprehensive Drug Reform Act of 1987."
 q. The person has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to, or if a juvenile, has been adjudicated delinquent on the basis of an act which if committed by an adult would constitute an offense under N.J.S.2C:20-1 et al. involving theft of property from the landlord, the leased premises or other tenants residing in the same building or complex; or, being the tenant or lessee of such leased premises, knowingly harbors therein a person who has been so convicted or has so pleaded, or otherwise permits such a person to occupy those premises for residential purposes, whether continuously or intermittently.
 r. The person is found in a civil action, by a preponderance of the evidence, to have committed a violation of the human trafficking provisions set forth in section 1 of P.L.2005, c.77 (C.2C:13-8) within or upon the leased premises or the building or complex of buildings and land appurtenant thereto, or the mobile home park, in which those premises are located; or, being the tenant or lessee of such leased premises, knowingly harbors or harbored therein a person who has been engaged in human trafficking, or otherwise permits or permitted such a person to occupy those premises for residential purposes, whether continuously or intermittently. No action for removal may be brought pursuant to this subsection more than two years after the alleged violation has terminated. A criminal conviction or a guilty plea to a crime of human trafficking under section 1 of P.L.2005, c.77 (C.2C:13-8) shall be considered prima facie evidence of civil liability under this subsection.
 For purposes of this section, (1) "developmental disability" means any disability which is defined as such pursuant to section 3 of P.L.1977, c.82 (C.30:6D-3); (2) "member of the immediate family" means a person's spouse, parent, child or sibling, or a spouse, parent, child or sibling of any of them; and (3) "permanently" occupies or occupied means that the occupant maintains no other domicile at which the occupant votes, pays rent or property taxes or at which rent or property taxes are paid on the occupant's behalf.
 L.1974, c.49, s.2; amended 1975, c.311, s.1; 1981, c.8, s.1; 1981, c.226, s.13; 1989, c.294, s.1; 1991, c.91, s.68; 1991, c.307; 1991, c.509, s.19; 1993, c.342, s.1; 1995, c.269; 1996, c.131; 1997, c.228, s.1; 2000, c.113, s.3; 2013, c.51, s.7.
 Previous
 Next
 Disclaimer: These codes may not be the most recent version. New Jersey may have more current or accurate information. We make no warranties or guarantees about the accuracy, completeness, or adequacy of the information contained on this site or the information linked to on the state site. Please check official sources.
 Free Daily Summaries in Your Inbox
 You're all set! You already receive all suggested Justia Opinion Summary Newsletters. You can explore additional available newsletters here.
 Sign up for our free summaries and get the latest delivered directly to you.
 Our Suggestions:
 Enter Your Email
 Free Webinars for All
 Ask a Lawyer
Get Free Answers
 Have a legal question? Get free answers from experienced lawyers!
 Ask Question
 Find a Lawyer
 Lawyers - Get Listed Now!
 Get a free directory profile listing
 Toggle button
 Get free summaries of new opinions delivered to your inbox!
 Enter Your Email
 Sign Up
 Justia Legal Resources
 Find a Lawyer
 Bankruptcy Lawyers
 Business Lawyers
 Criminal Lawyers
 Employment Lawyers
 Estate Planning Lawyers
 Family Lawyers
 Personal Injury Lawyers
 More... 
 Individuals
 Bankruptcy
 Criminal
 Divorce
 DUI
 Estate Planning
 Family Law
 Personal Injury
 More...
 Business
 Business Formation
 Business Operations
 Employment
 Intellectual Property
 International Trade
 Real Estate
 Tax Law
 More... 
 Law Schools
 Dictionary
 Admissions
 Financial Aid
 Course Outlines
 Law Journals
 Blogs
 Employment
 More...
 U.S. Federal Law
 U.S. Constitution
 U.S. Code
 Regulations
 Supreme Court
 Circuit Courts
 District Courts
 Dockets & Filings
 More...
 U.S. State Law
 State Constitutions
 State Codes
 State Case Law
 California
 Florida
 New York
 Texas
 More... 
 Other Databases
 Legal Jobs
 Legal Blogs
 Business Forms
 Product Recalls
 Patents
 Trademarks
 Countries
 More...
 Marketing Solutions
 Justia Connect Membership
 Justia Lawyer Directory
 Justia Premium Placements
 Justia Elevate (SEO, Websites)
 Justia Amplify (PPC, GBP)
 Justia Onward Blog
 Testimonials
 More...
 © 2026 Justia
 Justia Connect
 Legal Portal
 Company
 Help
 Terms of Service
 Privacy Policy
 Marketing Solutions


