SOURCE: https://www.bayonnenj.org/_Content/pdf/Rent-Control-Ordinance-2023.pdf
RETRIEVED: 2026-10-04

 
1 
 
 
 
Editor's Note: The power to control rent is pa rt of the general police power contained in 
N.J.S.A. 40:48-1.2. 
 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF BAYONNE, COUNTY OF HUDSON, 
 AMENDING CHAPTER 16, RENT CONTROL, OF THE MUNICIPAL CODE  
OF THE CITY OF BAYONNE  
 
 
BE IT ORDAINED by the Municipal Council of the City of Bayonne, in Hudson 
County, New Jersey, as follows: 
 
 
Section I. Chapter 16 of the Municipal Code of the City of Bayonne entitled “Rent 
Control” is hereby amended by the removal in its entirety of the current ordinance and the 
replacement of Chapter 16 “Rent Control” with the following: 
 
 
CHAPTER 16 RENT CONTROL 
 
 
§ 16-1. EFFECTIVE DATE; PURPOSE;  CONSTRUAL OF PROVISIONS; 
DEFINITIONS 
 
§ 16-1.1. Effective Date.  
Whereas, in 1973, the City of Bayonne passed Ordinance No. O-73-06, an ordinance that 
restricted the amount of rent landlords could ch arge for the use and occupancy of a rental unit 
in their residential dwelling, subject to a few exceptions. This type of rent restriction is known 
as rent control; and 
 
Whereas, Ordinance No. O-73-06 was extended each year by the adoption of a new ordinance. 
The most recent ordinance that extended rent control for rental units in most residential 
dwellings was Ordinance No. O-11-11, which e nded on June 30, 2011. Thereafter, the City of 
Bayonne did not pass a new ordinance to extend Ordinance No. O-73-06, the effect of which, 
lifted rent control for resident ial units that were vacant on June 30, 2011. However, the rental 
units that housed residential tenants as of J une 30, 2011 remained subject  to rent control by 
virtue of their occupancy; and 
 
Whereas, on November 9, 2011, the City of Bayonne passed Ordinance No. O-11-33, which 
established protections for residential tenants still occupying a rental unit subject to rent control; 
and   
 
Whereas, the City of Bayonne has found that there is a need to provide additional, clearer, and 
revised protections for residentia l tenants who have been conti nuously residing in rental units 
subject to rent control since June 30, 2011 than that was afforded to them by Ordinance No. O-
11-33; 
 

 
2 
 
Now, therefore, be it Ordained, by the Municipal Council of the City of Bayonne that Ordinance 
No. O-11-33, and every ordinance amending it thereafter, is here by repealed and replaced with 
this Ordinance, No. __________, effec tive as of ____________ _____, 2023. Any and all 
amendments and supplements of this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect immediately after 
passage and this Chapter may be further amended from time to time by the Municipal Council in 
a manner provided by law.  
 
§ 16-1.2. Declaration of Purpose.  
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish a method to continue th e protection for those 
residential who are legally occ upying a rental unit subject to re nt control at the time of the 
passage of this Chapter as of the date of its passage.  It is common knowledge that in the State 
of New Jersey the interests of tenants are pr otected by State Law, N. J.S.A. 2A:18-53 or Anti-
Eviction Act, N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.1 et seq. from evictions without just cause and directly on point 
for unreasonable rent increases, N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.1f. 
 
 
§ 16-1.3. Construal of Provisions.  
This Chapter being necessary for the welfare of the City and its inhabitants shall be liberally 
construed to effectuate the purpose thereof. 
 
§ 16-1.4. Definitions.  
 
As used hereinafter in this Chapter: 
 
Annual Operating Expenses – Shal l mean yearly expenses incurr ed by the landlord of the 
Dwelling for the following items: heating fuel; utilit ies; real estate taxes; insurance; payroll; 
janitorial services and materials; painting an d decorating; ordinary and routine repairs and 
maintenance; and miscellaneous  administrative expenses. A nnual Operating Expenses for 
purposes of this Chapter shall not include: depreciation; mortgage interest and amortization; the 
cost of Major Capital Improveme nts or Individual Rental Un it Improvements; or expenses 
derived from any commercial or non-housing portions of th e Dwelling. Where an Annual 
Operating Expense benefitted both a residential tenant(s) and commercial user(s), such Annual 
Operating Expense shall be apportioned accordingly between residential and commercial tenants 
to determine the amount of A nnual Operating Expense attributab le to residential use of a 
Dwelling for purposes of calculating allowable Hardship Surcharge under this Chapter. 
 
Base Rent – Shall mean the monetary amoun t approved by the Boar d and properly noticed 
according to Section 16-4, which the Rent-Controlle d Tenant is required to pay to the landlord 
for the use and enjoyment of their Covered Rent al Unit and any Core Services, but not for the 
use and enjoyment of any Supplemental Services , for the Rent-Controlled Tenant’s applicable 
rental term. Base Rent shall include subsequent  Rent Increases as they become authorized 
pursuant to Section 16-4. Base Rent shall not include any of the Surcharges authorized pursuant 
to Section 16-5.   
 
Board – Shall mean any rent c ontrol board, rent equity board, or other agency or official 
authorized to administer and decide matters regarding this Rent Control Chapter. 
 

 
3 
 
Consumer Price Index (CPI) – Shall mean the C onsumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers, 
specifically for the “all items index, not seasonally adjusted” for the region of the United States 
of which Bayonne, New Jersey, is a part, published periodically by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, 
United States Department of Labor.  
 
Consumer Price Index Percentage (CPI Percentage) – Shall mean  the 12-month percent change 
of the Consumer Price Index. 
 
Core Services – Shall mean Services for which no separate or identifiable periodic surcharge is 
paid by the Rent-Controlled Tenant and which are provided by a landlord to the Rent-Controlled 
Tenant either: (1) to use within their Covered Rental Unit or (2) to use outside of their Covered 
Rental Unit in the common areas of the Dwe lling and its surrounding land, use of which is 
available to all tenants in the Dwelling. 
 
Covered Rental Unit – Shall mean any Rental Unit: (1) designated as one that was subject to rent 
control pursuant to Ordinance No. O-73-06 and its progeny ordi nances, and (2) which, as of 
January XX, 2023, continues to house  a tenant who has not vacate d the Rental Unit or been 
legally evicted from the Rental Unit since June 30, 2011. 
• Exempt from this Chapter are the following, which shall be defined as 
“Exempt Rental Units” for the purposes of this Chapter: 
• Rental Units occupied by persons whose rents are subsidized 
in whole in part by federal or state law or  regulations, 
including, but not limited to: 
• Section 8 of the U.S. Housing Act of 1937 
• Section 202 of the Housing Act of 1959 (12 U.S.C. 
1701q), as amended; 
• Section 811 of the Nati onal Affordable Housing 
Act of 1990 (P.L. 101-625) as amended by the 
Housing and Community Development Act of 
1992 (P.L. 102-550), the Rescission Act (P.L. 104-
19) the American Homeownership and 
Opportunity Act of 200 0 (P.L. 106-569), and the 
Frank Melville Supporti ve Housing Act of 2010 
(P.L. 111–374). 
• Rental Units permanently dec ontrolled pursuant to Section 
16-9 of this Chapter. 
 
Decision – Shall mean any formal action taken by the Board or the Rent Control Office to resolve 
a matter that was brought to it. 
 
Dwelling – Shall mean any building, structure, trailer, land used as a trailer park rented, or land 
offered for rent to one or more tenants or family units. 
• Exempt from this Chapter are the following, which shall be defined as 
“Exempt Dwellings” for the purposes of this Chapter: 
• Dwellings containing four or less Rental Units. 
• Motels. 
• Hotels. 

 
4 
 
• Commercial and industrial space. 
• Dwellings owned or operated by the United States, the State 
of New Jersey, any political  subdivision, agency, or 
instrumentality ther eof, any municipal ity or any public 
housing authority. 
• Dwellings that are subject to Federal preemption by the 
United States Department  of Housing and Urban 
Development pursuant to Federal law or regulation 
including, but not limited to 24 CFR 246 and 24 CFR 406, 
or are subject to state preemption pursuant to New Jersey 
State law or regulation. 
• Newly constructed Dwellings rented for the first time which 
have been approved by the Building Department of the City 
of Bayonne for a Certificate of  Occupancy after November 
1, 2011. The landlord of such newly constructed Dwellings 
may charge rent not subject to the rental constraints of this 
chapter. 
 
Gross Annual Income – Shall mean the money derived from the Dwelling, including, but not 
limited to, funds resulting from usage of garage s or washing machines, and any other funds 
collected as a result of extra surcharges imposed by the landlord. Gross Annual Income shall not 
include income derived from any commercial or non-housing portions of the Dwelling. 
 
Individual Rental Unit Impr ovement (“IRUI”) – Shall mean  any renovation, preservation, 
replacement, or improvement work  which substantially adds to th e value, or life, of a single 
Covered Rental Unit, but does not include ordinary  or routine repairs, or  maintenance, done to 
the Covered Rental Unit. Individual Rental Unit Improvements shall include, but are not limited 
to, things in the nature of repl acing major appliances like a stove  or a refrigerator, replacing or 
installing fixtures, and installing cabinetry. 
 
Legal Eviction – Shall mean a landlord’s recovered possession of a Rental Unit from a Court of 
law under one of the causes enumerated in State law pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:18-53 or N.J.S.A. 
2A:18-61.1 et seq. 
 
Major Capital Improvement (“MCI”) – Shall mean any renovation, preservation, replacement, or 
improvement work which substantially adds to the value, or life, of the entire Dwelling or 
Covered Rental Units, but does not include ordinary or routine repairs, or maintenance. The work 
must benefit more than one Covered Rental Unit,  not just a single Cove red Rental Unit. Major 
Capital Improvements shall include, but are not lim ited to, things in the nature of installing or 
replacing a roof, boilers, HVAC systems or units, plumbing, electrical wiring, security systems, 
community laundry facilities, community recreation rooms or areas, or pools.  
 
Opinion – Shall mean the Board’s written statement explaining a Resolution of the Board. 
 
Rent-Controlled Tenant – Shall mean a tenant legally occupying a Covered Rental Unit. 
 
Rental Unit – Shall mean: (1) the square feet  of a Dwelling rented or offered for rent for 

 
5 
 
residential purposes to one or more tenants or family unit, (2 ) fixtures contained within the 
designated square feet of the Dwelling, and (3) furnishings provided by the landlord for use 
within the designated square feet of the Dwelling. 
 
Resolution – Shall mean a written document issued by the Board which decides a matter that was 
put before the Board. 
 
Rooms – Shall mean bedrooms, living rooms, kitc hens, and dining rooms. Any other area in a 
Covered Rental Unit is not considered a room for the purposes of this Chapter. 
 
Services – Shall include, without limitation: repairs; decorating and maintenance; provision of 
light, heat, air conditioning, hot water, cold water, telephone, and elevator service; privileges for 
use of common kitchen, bath, or laundry facilities; privileges for use of common halls, corridors, 
stairs, rooms, yards, or other common areas; ma id, linen, janitorial, garbage, or recycling 
services; privileges for the use of common parking facilities; and any other benefit, privilege, or 
shared use of facilities or fixtures granted to or permitted to be enjoyed by the tenant in connection 
with the tenant’s use or occupancy of their Rental Unit. 
 
Supplemental Services – Shall mean any Services for whic h the landlord and Rent-Controlled  
Tenant have agreed the Rent-Controlled Tenant will pay for a separate or specifically identifiable 
Surcharge. 
 
Surcharge – Shall mean an additional charge, fee, or payment paid by a Rent-Controlled Tenant 
for something. 
 
Total Approved Rent – Shall include Base Rent and all Surcharges authorized by this Chapter. 
 
§ 16-2.  RENT CONTROL 
 
All rents for Covered Rental Units  are hereby controlled at the Base Rent in effect for such 
Covered Rental Units at the time of adoption of this Chapter, and no rent increases or surcharges 
shall be hereinafter demanded or paid except as authorized by this Chapter. 
 
All previously approv ed rent increases and surcharges in effect at the time of adoption of this 
Chapter shall remain in effect and subject to the provisions of this Chapter as if the existing rent 
increase or surcharge had been approved and effective under this current Chapter. 
 
§ 16-3. RENT CONTROL BOARD AND RENT CONTROL OFFICE 
 
§ 16-3.1. Board.  
a. Composition of the Board. There is hereby cr eated a Rent Control Board (“Board”) to 
administer this Chapter. The Board shall c onsist of seven Board Members: five core 
members and two alternate members. 
b. Appointment. Each Board Member shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of 
the Municipal Council.  
c. Oath. An appointed Board Member shall take the following oath: “I do solemnly swear 
(or affirm) that I am duly qualified, according to the constitution of this state, to exercise 

 
6 
 
the duties of a Member of the Rent Control Board to which I have been appointed; that I 
take this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that 
I will, to the best of my ability, faithfully discharge the duties of Board Member. So help 
me God.” 
d. Term of Office. Board Members shall serve for a term of three (3) years, and until their 
successors are appointed and qualified.  
e. Vacancy on Board. If a permanent vacancy should occur among the core members of the 
Board, then the Mayor, with consent of the Municipal Council, may appoint either of the 
alternate members or a new member to fill the unexpired term of the core member.  
f. Compensation. Board Members shall serve without compensation. 
g. Reimbursement for Reasonable Educational Expenses. Board Members shall be allowed 
reimbursement of reasonable expenses incu rred to attend educational programs to 
maintain or obtain knowledge required to se rve as an effective Board Member, which 
shall include, but is not limited to, attend ing conferences, lectures, or seminars on the 
topic of rent control. In order to qualify for reimbursement, Board Members must obtain 
prior approval from the Mayor  and Council to attend the educational program, which 
approval shall indicate the Board Members permitted to attend, the particular educational 
program that will be reimbursed, and the am ount up to which each Board Member will 
be reimbursed. 
 
§ 16-3.2. Board Leadership. 
a. Chairperson of the Board. At the first Board meeting of the calendar year, the Board, by 
a majority vote of Core Members, shall elect from their number a Chairperson of the 
Board who shall preside at all of its meeti ngs. The Chairperson of the Board shall hold 
office for one (1) year and until the first Board meeting of the subsequent calendar year. 
The Chairperson of the Board shall have the right to debate and vote on all questions 
before the Board. If the Board, at its first meeting of the calendar year, fails to elect a 
Chairperson of the Board, the Mayor shall a ppoint a Chairperson of the Board, and in 
that case, no confirmation by the Board sh all be necessary. A Chairperson may be 
removed from their position by a majority vote of Core Members.  
b. Vice-Chairperson of the Board. At the firs t Board meeting of the calendar year, the 
Board, by a majority vote, shall elect from their number a Vice-Chairperson of the Board 
who shall preside at all of its meetings when the Chairperson of the Board does not 
preside. The Vice-Chairperson of the Board sh all hold office for on e (1) year and until 
the first Board meeting of th e subsequent calendar year. The Vice-Chairperson of the 
Board shall have the right to debate and vote on all questions before the Board. If the 
Board, at its first meeting of the calendar year, fails to el ect a Vice-Chairperson of the 
Board, the Mayor shall appoint a Vice-Chairper son of the Board, and in that case, no 
confirmation by the Board shall be necessary. A Vice-Chairperson may be removed from 
their position by a majority vote of Core Members. 
 
§ 16-3.3. Board Meetings and Board Activity. 
a. Quorum. A minimum of three Board Members must be in attendance in order for the 
Board to hold a meeting, or a hearing. 
b. 
Presence at Board Meetings. All Board Members shall be entitled to attend, and sit in on, 
any meeting of, or hearing before, the Board.  
c. Participation and Voting at Board Meetings. All five core members may participate and 

 
7 
 
vote at any meeting of, or h earing before, the Board. Alternate members are generally 
non-participatory and non-voting, except when a core member  is absent on the day that 
a matter is being determined or recuses th emselves from a matter, in which case an 
alternate member who has attended the full hearing or hearings on a specific matter may 
participate, and vote on that matter, in lieu of the absent or recused core member. 
d. Formal Action. In order for a ny formal action to be taken by the Board, the majority of 
voting Board Members present must vote in the affirmative. 
 
§ 16-3.4. Disqualification of Member. 
a. No individual shall be permitted to serve as  a core member or alternate member of the 
Board if the individual is a landlord or tenant subject to the provisions of this Chapter, or 
if the individual has an immediate family member who is a landlord or tenant subject to 
the provisions of this Chapter; or if the individual has a financial interest in a Dwelling 
subject to the provisions of this Chapter.  
b. A core member or alternate member of the Board shall recuse themselves from participating 
in any way in any determinations, hearings, complaints, applications, or other matters brought 
before the Board or the Rent Control Office relating to a Dwelling in which the member 
resides, which includes that the member shall not speak on such matters at any Board meeting 
or hearing, shall not question or participate directly or indirectly in questioning a witness at a 
meeting or hearing, shall not speak with other Board members or the Rent Control Office 
about any matters from which they must recuse themselves, and may not vote on such matters. 
 
§ 16-3.5. Powers and Duties. 
The Board is hereby granted, and shall have an d exercise, in addition to other powers herein 
granted, all the powers necessary an d appropriate to carry out and execute the purposes of this 
Chapter, including but not limited to the following: 
a. To issue and promulgate such rules and regul ations as it deems necessary to implement 
the purposes of this Chapter, which shall have the force of law until revised, repealed, or 
amended from time to time by the Board in the exercise of its discretion, providing that 
such rules or regulations are filed with the City Clerk. 
b. To hold hearings and adjudica te applications from landlords for Hardship Surcharges, 
Major Capital Improvement Surcharges, an d Individual Rental  Unit Improvement 
Surcharges, in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.  
c. To hold hearings and adjudica te complaints from Rent-Controlled Tenants for invalid 
rent increases or invalid surcharges in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
d. To hold hearings and adjudicate complaints from Rent-Controlled Tenants alleging that 
their landlord has failed to pay money owed according to a Board Decision in 
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
e. To hold hearings and adjudicate applications from Rent-Controlled Tenants for reduced 
rent in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
f. To hold hearings and adjudica te complaints brought sua sponte by the Board against a 
landlord to determine the validity of rent increases or surcharges. 
g. To hold hearings and adjudica te applications from landlords seeking exemption from 
this Chapter. 
h. To hold hearings and adjudicate complaints from tenants seeking a determination that 
an individual is a rent-controlled tenant. 
i. To inform the Rent Control Office of potential violations of Section 16-14. 

 
8 
 
j. To issue subpoenas requiring the production of  witnesses and documents, and to take 
testimony and swear in witnesses in the execution of the Board’s powers and duties. 
k. To enact Resolutions and, if necessary, issue Opinions regarding the various or random 
applications and matters that may be submitted or brought before the Board from time to 
time for consideration or adjudication. 
 
At all hearings pursuant to Section 16-3.5(b)–(f), the Board shall give both the landlord and the 
Rent-Controlled Tenant(s) reasonable opportunity  to be heard before  making any Decision, 
except that in cases regarding multiple Covered Rental Units with one similar application, issue, 
or complaint, the Board, in its discretion, may limit repetitious te stimony or ask that a 
spokesperson for the affected Rent-Controlled Tenants be appointed by a majority of the affected 
Rent-Controlled Tenants looking to be heard by the Board. 
 
§ 16-3.6. Termination. 
Both core and alternate Board members may be removed from office by the Mayor, at the 
Mayor’s discretion, upon written notice of a violation of duty arising out of the commission by 
the Board member of any of the following infract ions: inefficiency, neg ligence of duties, or 
malfeasance. 
 
§ 16-3.7. Rent Control Office. 
The Board shall have a Rent Control Office and such staff working in th e Rent Control Office, 
including a Rent Regulation Offi cer and Rent Control Board Secr etary, as may be necessary to 
perform the Board’s functions and duties including, but not limited to: 
a. To supply non-legal information and assist ance to landlords and Rent-Controlled 
Tenants to help them comply with the provisions of this Chapter. 
b. To keep an accurate record of the proce dures of the Board and enter the same upon 
the minutes. 
c. To create and amend applications, forms, and procedures necessary to implement the 
purposes of this Chapter. 
d. To receive all completed a pplications and complaints  from landlords and Rent-
Controlled Tenants and process the same for determination by the Board. 
e. To adjudicate Applications for CPI In crease and Applications for Permanent 
Decontrol in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
f. To issue complaints and summonses when appropriate according to Section 16-14. 
 
§ 16-3.8. Yearly Rent-Controlled Tenant Registration. 
On or before December 1 of every year, all la ndlords of a Dwelling that includes any Covered 
Rent Units must file a completed Registry of  Rent-Controlled Tenants with the Rent Control 
Office. All landlords must provide the complete d Registry of Rent-Controlled Tenants to all 
tenants listed in the Registry. 
 
§ 16-4. PERMISSIBLE RENT INCREASES 
 
§ 16-4.1. Consumer Price Index (CPI) Increase.  
a. Application.  
i. For Rent-Controlled Tenants with a lease term of less than one year, a landlord 
may be allowed a CPI Increase in rent based on changes to the cost-of-living every 

 
9 
 
year. A landlord shall be permitted to apply to the Office for a CPI Increase by 
submitting a complete and proper Application for CPI Increase to the Rent Control 
Office.  
ii. For Rent-Controlled Tenants with a lease term of one year or more, a landlord may 
be allowed a CPI Increase in rent base d on changes to the co st-of-living at the 
expiration of every lease term. A landlord shall be permitted to apply to the Office 
for a CPI Increase by submitting an Applic ation for CPI Increase to the Rent 
Control Office. 
b. Rent Control Office Review. The Rent Contro l Office shall review the Application for 
CPI Increase to determine if the applica tion is complete and proper. Once the Rent 
Control Office has reviewed the Application for CPI Increase and determined that it is 
complete and proper, the Rent Control Office shall stamp the application to indicate that 
it is complete. 
c. Decision by the Rent Control Office. Within fifteen (15) days after the Rent Control 
Office stamped the completed Application for CPI Increase, the Rent Control Office shall 
decide whether to deny or approve of the Application for CPI Increase. 
i. If the Rent Control Office decides to a pprove the Application for CPI Increase, 
the Rent Control Office shall: (1) stam p the Application for CPI Increase to 
indicate that it is approved; (2) determine, and indicate on the approved 
Application for CPI Increas e, the appropriate CPI In crease per Covered Rental 
Unit based on the last reported CPI Percenta ge two months prior to the date the 
Rent Control Office determined that the application for CPI was complete and 
proper pursuant to subsection c. If that CPI Percentage is greater than 5.5%, then 
the Rent Control Office shall cap the Covered Rental Unit’s CPI Increase at 5.5% 
of the Covered Rental Unit’s current Ba se Rent; (3) fix the date upon which the 
CPI Increase shall take effect, in accordance with State Statutes, which date shall 
be no sooner than one year from the expiration of the most recent CPI Increase; 
and (4) notify the landlord of the app lication’s approved status by providing the 
landlord with an exact copy of the stamped approved application and a Notice of 
Approval of CPI Increase that indicates therein the amount of the approved CPI 
Increase for the Rent-Controlled Unit and the date that the CPI Increase is to take 
effect. 
ii. If the Rent Control Office decides to de ny the Application for CPI Increase, the 
Rent Control Office shall stamp the Application for CPI Increase to indicate that 
it is denied and provide a Notice of Denial to the landlord explaining the reason(s) 
for the denial. If an Application for CPI Increase is denied and the landlord is able 
to correct the issues that the Rent Control Office expl ained were the reasons for 
denial of the Application, the landlor d may submit a new Application for CPI 
Increase that corrects the issues.  
d. Notice to Rent-Controlled Tenant(s) of Approved Application. Within ten (10) days after 
receipt by the landlord of a copy of the stam ped approved Application for CPI Increase 
and a Notice of Approval of CPI Increase, the landlord shall,  by registered or certified 
mail return receipt requested or by personal service with a sworn a ffidavit of service, 
notify the applicable Rent-Cont rolled Tenants of the App lication for CPI Increase’s 
approval by providing each Rent-Controlled Te nant subject to the CPI Increase with 
exact copies of both the stamped approved A pplication for CPI Increase and the Notice 
of Approval of CPI Increase.  

 
10 
 
e. Notifying Rent Control Offi ce After Notice of Approved Application Has Been Given. 
Within fourteen (14) days after the landlord has finished providing notice in accordance 
with Subsection e above, the landlord shal l submit a Notice Log to the Rent Control 
Office confirming said notice has been provided to the Rent-Controlled Tenants. 
f. Collection of CPI Increase. A landlord sha ll not collect any CPI Increase from a Rent-
Controlled Tenant, and a Rent-Controlled Te nant’s obligation to pay an approved CPI 
Increase shall not accrue, until the effective date of the CPI Increase stated on the Notice 
of Approval of CPI Increase.  
g. Incorporation into Base Rent. Provided that the landlord’s Notice Log indicates that the 
appropriate Rent-Controlled Tenant(s) has received the Notice of Approval of CPI 
Increase that is required by Subsection e above , the CPI Increase shall be deemed to be 
part of the Base Rent on the effective date of the CPI Increase stated in the Notice of 
Approval of CPI Increase. 
h. Withdrawal of Approval of CPI Increase. An  approved CPI Increase  may be declared 
void and ineffective where the Rent Control O ffice finds that the landlord has failed to 
comply with the provisions of either subsection e and/or subsection f. 
i. Prohibition on Future Increases. No landlord shall be permitted to apply for, or collect, a 
CPI Increase under this Chapter if the Boar d has determined pursuant to Section 16-7 
that the landlord has not repaid invalid rent s or surcharges due or owing to the Rent-
Controlled Tenant(s) in accordance with a Board Resolution and/or related Opinion. Only 
when all such payments due and owing are pa id in full may the la ndlord apply for, or 
collect, a CPI Increase. 
 
§ 16-5. PERMISSIBLE SURCHARGES 
 
§ 16-5.1. Hardship Surcharge.  
a. Application. For all Dwellings containing Covered Rental Units, a landlord may apply to 
the Board for a 12-month surcharge based on financial hardship experienced within a 12-
month period ending one mont h before the filing of the Application for Hardship 
Surcharge, by submitting a complete and proper Application for Hardship Surcharge to 
the Rent Control Office. No documentation in  support of the Appli cation for Hardship 
Surcharge will be considered by the Board if it has not been submitted by the landlord 
with the Application for a Hardship Surcharg e or is not submitted to the Rent Control 
Office before the Rent Control Office issu es a Notice of Completed Application and 
Hearing pursuant to subsection c. 
b. Calculation of Allowable Surcharge.  
i. Calculation of the Hardship Surcharge amount per Covered Re ntal Unit shall be 
predicated on the particular financial information and documentation in the 
landlord’s Application for Hardship Surc harge relating to Gross Annual Income, 
Annual Operating Expenses, initial investme nt, and assessed fair market value of 
the property where the Dwelling is located and shall be based on the formula set 
forth in subsection ii below. 
ii. To qualify for a hardship surcharge, the landlord must prove that the Dwelling meets 
a minimum threshold requirement, namely, having the Dwelling’s Annual 
Operating Expenses exceed sixty (60)  percent of the Dwelling’s Gross Annual 
Income: 
 
ሾOperating Expensesሿ 𝒎𝒖𝒔𝒕 𝒃𝒆 𝒈𝒓𝒆𝒂𝒕𝒆𝒓 𝒕𝒉𝒂𝒏 ሾGross Annual Income ൈ0.60ሿ 

 
11 
 
 
iii. If the landlord meets the threshold set forth above in b(ii), then the amount of allowable 
monthly Hardship Surcharge per Covered Rental Unit shall be calculated using the two-
step process:  
 
Step 1: Calculate the total monthly Hardship Surcharge landlords can collect from all tenants. 
 
Total Monthly Hardship Surcharge ൌቌ
ቆ൬ቀ𝑮𝒓𝒐𝒔𝒔 𝑨𝒏𝒏𝒖𝒂𝒍 𝑰𝒏𝒄𝒐𝒎𝒆ష𝑶𝒑𝒆𝒓𝒂𝒕𝒊𝒏𝒈 𝑬𝒙𝒑𝒆𝒏𝒔𝒆𝒔
𝑮𝒓𝒐𝒔𝒔 𝑨𝒏𝒏𝒖𝒂𝒍 𝑰𝒏𝒄𝒐𝒎𝒆 ቁൈ𝟏𝟎𝟎൰ି𝟒𝟎%ቇൈ𝑮𝒓𝒐𝒔𝒔 𝑨𝒏𝒏𝒖𝒂𝒍 𝑰𝒏𝒄𝒐𝒎𝒆
𝟏𝟐 ቍ  
 
Step 2: Calculate the monthly Hardship Surcharge Per Covered Rental Unit 
 
Monthly Hardship Surcharge Per Unit =  ቀ
்௢௧௔௟ ெ௢௡௧௛௟௬ ு௔௥ௗ௦௛௜௣ ௌ௨௥௖௛௔௥௚௘
ே௨௠௕௘௥ ௢௙ ்௢௧௔௟ ோ௢௢௠௦ ௜௡ ஽௪௘௟௟௜௡௚ቁൈ# 𝑜𝑓 𝑅𝑜𝑜𝑚𝑠 𝑖𝑛 the Unit 
iv. For purposes of calculating Hardship Surcharge pursuant to the formula set forth in 
subsection ii above, for Dwellings containing fifty (50) or more Rental Units, the 
Gross Annual Income and Annual Operating Expenses reported in the Application 
for Hardship Surcharge must be certif ied by a certified public accountant if 
requested by the Board. Any Hardship Surcharge approved by the Board shall be 
apportioned equally among each Rental Un it in the Dwelling, including Covered 
Rental Units and non-Covered Rental Units . However, only payment of Hardship 
Surcharge by Rent-Controlled Tenants is mandated by this Chapter. 
c. Rent Control Office Review. The Rent Contro l Office shall review the Application for 
Hardship Surcharge to determine if the application is complete and proper. Once the Rent 
Control Office has determined that the Appli cation for Hardship Surcharge is complete 
and proper, the Rent Control O ffice shall: (1) stamp the applic ation to indicate that it is 
complete, (2) set a hearing date for when the Application for Hardship Surcharge will be 
considered by the Board, and (3) notify the la ndlord of the Application’s complete and 
proper status by providing the landlord with an exact copy of the stamped complete 
Application for Hardship Surcharge and a Notice of Completed Application and Hearing 
that has the hearing date i ndicated therein and includes la nguage indicating that Rent-
Controlled Tenants have a right to file an opposition to the Application for Hardship 
Surcharge. 
d. Notice to Rent-Controlled Tenants of Application. Within ten (10) days after receipt by 
the landlord of the stamped complete copy of  the Application for Hardship Surcharge 
and Notice of Completed App lication and Hearing, the land lord shall notify the Rent-
Controlled Tenant of the application’s complete and proper status by providing all Rent-
Controlled Tenant in the Dwelling with exact copies of both by registered or certified 
mail return receipt requested or by personal service with a sworn affidavit of service. 
e. Informing the Rent Control Office that Tenant Notice Has Been Given. After notice has 
been given by the landlord to the Rent-C ontrolled Tenants pursuant to Subsection d 
above the landlord shall provide  the Rent Control Office wi th a Notice Log to confirm 
that the notice required by Subsection d above  has been sent to all Rent-Controlled 
Tenants in the Dwelling. Landlord must provide the Rent Control Office with this Notice 
Log no later than thirty (30) days prior to the hearing.  
f. Opposition to the Application. No later than twenty (20) days prior to the hearing date, 
the Rent-Controlled Tenants must submit written opposition, including copies of any and 
all supporting documentation, if any, to th e Rent Control Office for the Board’s 

 
12 
 
consideration at the hearing. The Rent Cont rol Office will make the written opposition 
available to the landlord for copying and inspection. 
g. List of Witnesses. No later than fourteen ( 14) days prior to the hearing date, both the 
landlord and the Rent-Controlled Tenants must  provide the Rent C ontrol Office with a 
list of all witnesses they plan to have tes tify at the hearing, if any. The Rent Control 
Office will make the landlord’s and Rent-Controlled Tenants’ list of witnesses available 
for copying and inspection. 
h. Hearing. Provided that the Rent Control Office has determined that the landlord’s Notice 
Log indicates that all of the Rent-Controlled Tenants in the Dwelling have received 
satisfactory notice of the A pplication for Hardship Surcharge in accordance with 
Subsection d above, the Board may proceed to consider the merits of the Application on 
the date the matter is scheduled for hearing. At the hearing, the Board shall give both the 
landlord and the Rent-Controlled Tenants an  opportunity to present their case, which 
shall consist of presenting evidence, calling witnesses, and the like. No submissions or 
evidence will be considered by the Board other than those provided to the Rent Control 
Office in accordance with Subs ections f and g above. The only exception to this rule is 
when the Board, itself, requests specific additional submissions or evidence in order to 
reach a decision on the matter, which then, in order to be considered by the Board, must 
be provided to the Rent Control Office as directed by the Board. 
i. Decision by Board. Within sixt y (60) days of th e completion of the hearing for the 
Application for Hardship Surcharge, the Bo ard shall determine wh ether to approve or 
deny the Application for Hardship Surcharge, enact a Resolution accordingly, and issue 
a written Opinion, if necessary. In the event that the Application for Hardship Surcharge 
indicates that the landlord is not receiving a fair net operating income, the Board shall 
approve the Application for Hardship Surc harge and adopt an appropriate Resolution, 
and where the Board may deem it necessary, issue an Opinion. The Rent Control Office 
shall then notify the landlord of the app lication’s approved status by providing the 
landlord with: (1) an exact copy of the Boar d’s Resolution and Opinion, if any, (2) a 
Notice of Approval of Applicat ion, which indicates therein the amount of the Hardship 
Surcharge and effective date of the Hardship Surcharge fixed by the Board in accordance 
with State Statutes, and (3 ) exact copy of the Applica tion for Hardship Surcharge 
stamped to indicate that it has been approved. In the event the Application for Hardship 
Surcharge is denied, the Rent Control O ffice shall then notify the landlord of the 
application’s denied status by providing the landlord with: (1) an exact copy of the 
Board’s Resolution and Opinion, if any, and (2) a Notice of Denial of Application, which 
indicates therein the reasons for denial.  
j. Notice to Rent-Controlled Tenants of Board’s Decision. Within ten (10) days after receipt 
by the landlord of copies of either the Board’s Resolution and Opinion, if any, Notice of 
Approval of Application, and stamped appr oved copy of the Application for Hardship 
Surcharge, or the Board’s Resolution and Op inion and Notice of Denial of Application, 
the landlord shall notify the Rent-Controlled  Tenants of the Board’s Decision by 
providing exact copies of the same to a ll Rent-Controlled Tenants in the Dwelling by 
registered or certified mail return receipt requested or by personal service with a sworn 
affidavit of service. 
k. Notifying Rent Control Office After Notice Has Been Given. Within fourteen (14) days 
after the landlord has finished providing no tice in accordance with Subsection j above, 
the landlord shall submit an additional Notice Log to the Rent Control Office confirming 

 
13 
 
said notice has been provided to the Rent-Controlled Tenants.  
l. Lack of Incorporation into Base Rent. No Hardship Surcharge allowed by the Board is 
to be deemed to be part of the Base Rent, nor shall any such Hardship Surcharges be used 
to calculate future CPI Increases. 
m. Withdrawal of Approval of Hardship Surcharge. An approved Hardship Surcharge may 
be declared void and ineffective where the Rent Control Office fi nds that the landlord 
has failed to comply with the provisions of either subsection j and/or subsection k. 
n. Prohibition on Future Surcharges. No landlord shall be permitted to apply for, or collect, 
a Hardship Surcharge under this Chapter if the Board has determined pursuant to Section 
16-7 that the landlord has not repaid invalid rents or surcharges due or owing to Rent-
Controlled Tenant(s) in accordance with a Board Resolution and/or related Opinion. Only 
when all such payments due and owing are pa id in full may the la ndlord apply for, or 
collect, a Hardship Surcharge. 
 
§ 16-5.2. Major Capital Improvement Surcharge. 
a. Application. A landlord may a pply to the Board for a surcharge based on the cost of 
conducting Major Capital Improvements within one year from the date of completion of 
the Major Capital Improvement work that is the subject of the application by submitting 
a complete and proper Application for a Major Capital Improvement Increase to the Rent 
Control Office. No increase shall be permitted for Major Capital Improvements 
completed more than 12 months prior to the date the Application is submitted to the Board 
unless the landlord establishes to the Boar d good cause for the landlord’s delay in 
applying for the surcharge. The Application for a Major Capital Improvement Surcharge 
shall itemize each expense included as part of  the landlord’s cost of the Major Capital 
Improvement with sufficient detail for the Board to confirm that the expense was incurred 
specifically as part of the Major Capital Im provement work, and the landlord shall all 
submit proofs of payment of  each such expense that is included in the landlord’s 
Application for a Major Capital Improvement Surcharge. No documentation in support of 
the Application for a Major Capital Improveme nt Surcharge will be  considered by the 
Board if it has not been submitted by the landlord with the Application for a Major Capital 
Improvement Surcharge or is not submitted to  the Rent Control Office before the Rent 
Control Office issues a Notice of Comple ted Application and Hearing pursuant to 
subsection b. 
b. Rent Control Office Review. The Rent Control Office shall review the Application for a 
Major Capital Improvement Surcharge to determine if the application is complete and 
proper. Once the Rent Control Office has revi ewed the Application for a Major Capital 
Improvement Surcharge and determined that it is complete and proper, the Rent Control 
Office shall: (1) stamp the application indicating that it is complete, (2) set a hearing date 
for when the Application for a Major Capital Improvement Surcharge will be considered 
by the Board, and (3) and notify the landlord of  the application’s complete and proper 
status by providing the landlord with an exact  copy of Application for a Major Capital 
Improvement Surcharge that is stamped complete and a Notice of Completed Application 
and Hearing that has the hearing date indica ted therein and includes language indicating 
that Rent-Controlled Tenants have a right to  file an opposition to  the Application for 
Major Capital Improvement Surcharge. 
c. Notice to Rent-Controlled Tenants of Application. Within ten (10) days after receipt by 
the landlord of the stampe d complete copy of the Appl ication for a Major Capital 

 
14 
 
Improvement Surcharge and Notice of Completed Application and Hearing, the landlord 
shall notify the Rent-Controlled Tenants of a pplication’s complete and proper status by 
providing the appropriate Rent-Controlled Tenants with exact copies of both by 
registered or certified mail return receipt requested or by personal service with a sworn 
affidavit of service.  
d. Informing the Rent Control Office that Tenant Notice Has Been Given. After notice has 
been given by the landlord to the Rent-C ontrolled Tenants pursuant to Subsection c 
above, the landlord shall provide the Rent C ontrol Office with a Notice Log to confirm 
that the notice required by Subsection c above  has been sent to all Rent-Controlled 
Tenants entitled to such notice. Landlord must provide the Rent Control Office with this 
Notice Log no later than thirty (30) days prior to the hearing. 
e. Opposition to the Application. No later than twenty (20) days prior to the hearing date, 
the Rent-Controlled Tenants must submit written opposition, including copies of any and 
all supporting documentation, if any, to th e Rent Control Office for the Board’s 
consideration at the hearing. The Rent Cont rol Office will make the written opposition 
available to the landlord for copying and inspection. 
f. List of Witnesses. No later than fourteen ( 14) days prior to the hearing date, both the 
landlord and the Rent-Controlled Tenants must  provide the Rent C ontrol Office with a 
list of all witnesses they plan to have tes tify at the hearing, if any. The Rent Control 
Office will make the landlord’s and Rent-Controlled Tenants’ list of witnesses available 
for copying and inspection. 
g. Hearing. Provided that the Rent Control Office has determined that the landlord’s Notice 
Log indicates that the appropr iate Rent-Controlled Tenants have received satisfactory 
notice of the Application for a Major Capital Improvement Surcharge in accordance with 
Subsection c above, the Board may proceed to consider the merits of the Application on 
the date the matter is scheduled for hearing. At the hearing, the Board shall give both the 
landlord and the Rent-Controlled Tenants an  opportunity to present their case, which 
shall consist of presenting evidence, calling witnesses, and the like. No submissions or 
evidence will be considered by the Board other than those provided to the Rent Control 
Office in accordance with Subs ections e and f above. The only exception to this rule is 
when the Board, itself, requests specific additional submissions or evidence in order to 
reach a decision on the matter, which then, in order to be considered by the Board, must 
be provided to the Rent Control Office as directed by the Board. 
h. Decision by Board. Decision by Board. Within sixty (60) da ys of the completion of a 
hearing for the Application for a Major Capital Improvement Surcharge, the Board shall 
determine whether to approve or deny the Application for Major Capital Improvement 
Surcharge, enact a Resolution accordingly, and issue a written Opinion, if necessary. The 
Rent Control Office shall then notify the landlord of the application’s approved status by 
providing the landlord with (1) an exact copy of the Board’s Resolution, (2) an exact copy 
of the Application for a Major Capital Improvement Surcharge that is stamped to indicate 
that it has been appr oved, and (3) a Notice of  Approval of Application indicates therein 
the amount of the approved Major Capital Improvement Surcharge and effective date of 
the Major Capital Improvement Surcharge fixed by the Board in accordance with State 
Statutes. In the event the A pplication for a Major Capita l Improvement Surcharge is 
denied, the Rent Control Office shall then notify the landlord of the application’s denied 
status by providing the landlord with: (1) an  exact copy of the Board’s Resolution and 
Opinion, if any, and (2) a Notice of Denial of  Application, which indicates therein the 

 
15 
 
reasons for denial. 
i. Maximum Amount of Major Capital Improvement Surcharge Allowed. The total amount 
of all Major Capital Improvement and Indivi dual Rental Unit Improvement Surcharges 
charged against a Rent-Controlled Unit at any given time sh all be no more than twenty 
(20) percent of the Rent-Controlled Unit’s monthly Base Rent, and the Board shall adjust 
the amount of Major Capital Improvement Surcharge approved for any one Major Capital 
Improvement Application accordingly. 
j. Notice to Rent-Controlled Tenants of Board’ s Decision.  Within ten (10) days after 
receipt by the landlord of copies of either the Board’s Resolution, Notice of Approval of 
Application, and stamped approved copy of  the Application for a Major Capital 
Improvement Surcharge, or the Board’s Resolution and Opinion and Notice of Denial of 
Application, the landlord sh all notify the Rent-Controlle d Tenants of the Board’s 
Decision by providing them with  exact copies of the same to all Rent-Controlled Tenants 
entitled to such notice by registered or cer tified mail return receipt requested or by 
personal service with a sworn affidavit of service.  
k. Notifying Rent Control Office After Notice Has Been Given. Within fourteen (14) days 
after the landlord has finished providing no tice in accordance with Subsection j above, 
the landlord shall submit an additional Notice Log to the Rent Control Office confirming 
said notice has been provided to the Rent-Controlled Tenants. 
l. Lack of Incorporation into Base Rent. No Major Capital Improvement Surcharge allowed 
by the Board is to be deemed to be part of the Base Rent, nor shall any such Major Capital 
Improvement Surcharges be used to calculate future CPI Increases. 
m. Withdrawal of Approval of a Major Capital Improvement Surcharge. An approved Major 
Capital Improvement Surcharge may be decl ared void and ineffective where the Rent 
Control Office finds that the landlord has fail ed to comply with the provisions of either 
subsection j and/or subsection k. 
n. Prohibition on Future Surcharges. No landlord shall be permitted to apply for, or collect, 
a Major Capital Improvement Surcharge under this Chapter if the Board has determined 
pursuant to Section 16-7 that the landlord ha s not repaid invalid rents or surcharges due 
or owing to Rent-Controlled Tenant(s) in accordance with a Board Resolution and/or 
related Opinion. Only when all such paymen ts due and owing are paid in full may the 
landlord apply for, or collect, a Major Capital Improvement Surcharge. 
 
§ 16-5.3. Individual Rental Unit Improvement Surcharge. 
a. Application. A landlord may a pply to the Board for a surcharge based on the cost of 
conducting Individual Rental Un it Improvements within one ye ar from the date of the 
application by submitting a complete and proper Application for an Individual Rental Unit 
Improvement Surcharge the Rent Control Offi ce. No increase shall be permitted for 
Individual Rental Unit Improvements complete d more than 12 months prior to the date 
the Application is submitted to the Board unless the landlord esta blishes to the Board 
good cause for the landlord’s delay in applying for the surcharge. The Application for an 
Individual Rental Unit Improvement Surc harge shall itemize each expense included as 
part of the landlord’s cost of the Individual Rental Unit Improvement with sufficient detail 
for the Board to confirm that the expense was incurred specifically as part of the 
Individual Rental Unit Improve ment work, and the landlord shall submit all proofs of 
payment of each such expense that is includ ed in the landlord’s  Application for an 
Individual Rental Unit Im provement Surcharge. No documentation in support of the 

 
16 
 
Application for an Individual Rental Unit Improvement Surcharge will be considered by 
the Board if it has not been submitted by the landlord with the Application for an 
Individual Rental Unit Improvement or is not submitted to the Rent Control Office before 
the Rent Control Office issues a Notice of Completed Application pursuant to subsection 
b. 
b. Rent Control Office Review. The Rent Control Office shall review the Application for an 
Individual Rental Unit Improvement Surcharge to determine if the application is complete 
and proper. Once the Rent Control Office has reviewed the Application for an Individual 
Rental Unit Improvement Surc harge and determined that it is complete and proper, the 
Rent Control Office shall: (1) stamp the application to indicate that it is complete, (2) set 
a hearing date for when the Application for an Individual Rental Unit Improvement 
Surcharge will be considered by the Board, and (3) notify the landlord of the application’s 
complete and proper status by providing the la ndlord with an exact copy of Application 
for an Individual Rental Unit Improvement Su rcharge that is stamped complete and a 
Notice of Completed Application and Hearing that has the hearing date indicated therein 
and includes language indicating that the Rent-C ontrolled Tenant has a right to file an 
opposition to the Application for an Individual Rental Unit Improvement Surcharge. 
c. Notice to Rent-Controlled Tenant of Applicat ion. Within ten (10) days after receipt by 
the landlord of the stamped complete copy of  the Applicatio n for an Individual Rental 
Unit Improvement Surcharge and Notice of Completed Application and Hearing, the 
landlord shall notify the Rent-Controlled Tenant of the application’s complete and proper 
status by providing the Rent-C ontrolled Tenant(s) whose Covered Rental Unit is the 
subject of the Application fo r an Individual Rental Unit Improvement Surcharge with 
exact copies of both by registered or certified mail return receipt requested or by personal 
service with a sworn affidavit of service.  
d. Informing the Rent Control Office that Tenant Notice Has Been Given. After notice has 
been given by the landlord to the Rent-Controlled Tenant pursuant to Subsection c above 
the landlord shall provide the Rent Control Of fice with a Notice Log to confirm that the 
notice required by Subsection c above has been  sent to the Rent-Controlled Tenants 
entitled to such notice. Landlord must provide  the Rent Control Office with this Notice 
Log no later than thirty (30) days prior to the hearing. 
e. Opposition to the Application. No later than tw enty (20) days prior to the hearing date, 
the Rent-Controlled Tenant must submit written opposition, including copies of any and 
all supporting documentation, if any, to th e Rent Control Office for the Board’s 
consideration at the hearing. The Rent Cont rol Office will make  the written opposition 
available to the landlord for copying and inspection. 
f. List of Witnesses. No later than fourteen (14) days prior to th e hearing date, both the 
landlord and the Rent-Controlled Tenant must provide the Rent Control Office with a list 
of all witnesses they plan to have testify at the hearing, if any. The Rent Control Office 
will make the landlord’s and Rent-Controlled Tenant’s list of witnesses available for 
copying and inspection. 
g. Hearing. Provided that the Rent Control Office has determined that the landlord’s Notice 
Log indicates that the Rent-C ontrolled Tenant has received  satisfactory notice of the 
Application for an Individual Rental Unit Improvement Surc harge in accordance with 
Subsection c above, the Board may proceed to consider the merits of the Application on 
the date the matter is scheduled for hearing. At the hearing, the Board shall give both the 
landlord and the Rent-Controlled Tenant an opportunity to present their case, which shall 

 
17 
 
consist of presenting evidence,  calling witnesses, and the like. No submissions or 
evidence will be considered by the Board othe r than those provided to the Rent Control 
Office in accordance with Subsections e and f above. The only exception to this rule is 
when the Board, itself, requests specific addi tional submissions or evidence in order to 
reach a decision on the matter, which then, in order to be considered by the Board, must 
be provided to the Rent Control Office as directed by the Board. 
h. Decision by Board. Within sixty (60) days  of the completion of a hearing for the 
Application for an Individual Rental Unit  Improvement Surcharge, the Board shall 
determine whether to approve or deny the Application for an Individual Rental Unit 
Improvement Surcharge, enact a Resolution a ccordingly, and issue a written Opinion, if 
necessary. The Rent Control Office shall th en notify the landlord of the application’s 
approved status by providing the landlord with: (1) an exact copy of the Board’s 
Resolution, (2) an exact copy of the App lication for an Indivi dual Rental Unit 
Improvement Surcharge that is stamped to i ndicate that is has been approved, and (3) a 
Notice of Approval of Application which indi cates therein the amount of the approved 
Individual Rental Unit Improvement Surcharge and effective date of the Individual Rental 
Unit Improvement Surcharge fixed by the Board in accordance with State Statutes. In the 
event the Application for an Individual Rental Unit Improvement Surcharge is denied, the 
Rent Control Office shall then notify the land lord of the applicatio n’s denied status by 
providing the landlord with: (1) an exact copy of the Board’s Resolution and Opinion, if 
any, and (2) a Notice of Denial of Applicati on, which indicates th erein the reasons for 
denial. 
i. Maximum Amount of Individual Rental Unit Improvement Surcharge Allowed. The total 
amount of all Major Capital Improvement and Individual Rental Unit Improvement 
Surcharges charged against a Rent-Controlled  Unit at any given time shall be no more 
than twenty (20) percent of the Rent-Controlled Unit’s monthly Base Rent, and the Board 
shall adjust the amount of I ndividual Rental Unit Improve ment Surcharge approved for 
any one Individual Rental Unit Improvement Application accordingly. 
j. Notice to Rent-Controlled Tenant of Board’s Decision.  Within ten (10) days after receipt 
by the landlord of copies of either the Board’s Resolution, Notice of Approval of 
Application, and stamped approved copy of the Application for an Individual Rental Unit 
Improvement Surcharge, or the Board’s Resolution and Opinion and Notice of Denial of 
Application, the landlord shall notify the Rent-Controlled Tenant of the Board’s decision 
by providing exact copies of the same to th e Rent-Controlled Tenant by registered or 
certified mail return receipt requested or by personal service with a sworn affidavit of 
service.  
k. Notifying Rent Control Office After Notice Has Been Given. Within fourteen (14) days 
after the landlord has finished providing not ice in accordance with Subsection j above, 
the landlord shall submit an additional Notice Log to the Rent Control Office confirming 
said notice has been provided to the Rent-Controlled Tenants. 
l. Lack of Incorporation into Base Rent. No Individual Rental Unit Improvement Surcharge 
allowed by the Board is to be deemed to be  part of the Base Re nt, nor shall any such 
Individual Rental Unit Improvement Surcharge be used to calculate future CPI Increases. 
m. Withdrawal of Approval of an Individual Rental Unit Improvement Surcharge. An 
approved Individual Rental Unit Improvement  Surcharge may be declared void and 
ineffective where the Rent Control Office finds that the landlord has failed to comply with 
the provisions of either subsection j and/or subsection k. 

 
18 
 
n. Prohibition on Future Surcharges.  No landlord shall be permitted to apply for, or collect, 
an Individual Rental Unit Im provement Surcharge under this  Chapter if the Board has 
determined pursuant to Section 16-7 that th e landlord has not repaid invalid rents or 
surcharges due or owing to Rent-Controll ed Tenant(s) in accordance with a Board 
Resolution and/or related Opinion. Only when all such payments due and owing are paid 
in full may the landlord apply for, or colle ct, an Individual Rent al Unit Improvement 
Surcharge. 
 
§ 16-5.4. Late Rent Surcharge. 
Where not otherwise prohibited by State law, if a Rent-Controlled Tenant fails to pay their 
landlord the Total Approved Rent for the use and the occupancy of their Covered Rental Unit, 
this Chapter shall permit a landlord to charge the Rent-Controlled Tenant a Late Rent 
Surcharge, whether termed a late rental fee or interest on rent paid late, of no more than $35. 
 
§ 16-5.5. Returned Check Surcharge. 
This chapter shall permit a landlord to charge a Rent-Controlled Tenant a Returned Check 
Surcharge of $35, if not otherwise prohibited by State law. 
 
§ 16-5.6. Supplemental Service Surcharge. 
A landlord is unrestricted by this Chapter from increasing the Surcharge associated with a 
Supplemental Service. 
 
§ 16-6. INVALID RENT INCREASES AND INVALID SURCHARGES 
 
§ 16-6.1. Defining An Invalid Rent Increase And An Invalid Surcharge.  
An invalid rent increase or an  invalid surcharge is a rent in crease or surcharge imposed by a 
landlord not in accordance with Section 16-4 Permissible Rent Increase or Section 16-5 
Permissible Surcharges.  
 
§ 16-6.2. Complaint for an Invalid Rent Increase or Invalid Surcharges by Rent-Controlled 
Tenant. 
a. Filing a Complaint. Any Rent-C ontrolled Tenant claiming that  an invalid rent increase 
or an invalid surcharge has been imposed must  file a complaint sta ting the provision of 
this Chapter alleged to have been violated  by the landlord and the facts upon which the 
allegation is based with the Rent Control Office no later than eighteen (18) months after 
making the first payment of any alleged invali d rent or invalid surcharge increase. All 
documentation that the Rent-Control Tenant  intends to rely upon in support of the 
complaint must be filed with the compla int. No documentation in support of the 
complaint will be considered by the Board if it has not been submitted with the complaint 
or is not submitted to the Re nt Control Office before the Re nt Control Offi ce issues a 
Notice of Complaint and Hearing pursuant to subsection c. 
b. Failure to File a Timely Complaint. Failure to file a complaint within eighteen (18) 
months after making the first payment of any alleged invalid  rent or inva lid surcharge 
shall be deemed to mean that the Rent-Controlled Tenant agrees to the rent increase or 
surcharge, and as a result, the Board may fi nd that a Rent-Controll ed Tenant is barred 
from filing a complaint about the same rent increase or surcharge, and is deemed to have 
waived the right to object to the rent increase or surcharge, absent a showing by the Rent-

 
19 
 
Controlled Tenant of reasonable excuse for failing to timely file a complaint. So long as 
the Rent-Controlled Tenant files a complaint within the eighteen (18) month time period, 
any rent increase or surcharge payments made by the Rent-Controlled Tenant to the 
landlord within eighteen (18) months shall not be construed as an agreement by the Rent-
Controlled Tenant to imposition of the increase or surcharge or be deemed to be a waiver 
by the Rent-Controlled Tenant of their right to file a complaint alleging the invalidity of 
that rent increase or surcharge.  
c. Rent Control Office Review. Once the complain t has been filed with the Rent Control 
Office, the Rent Control Office shall deter mine whether the complaint is complete and 
proper, meaning whether the Rent-Controlled  Tenant has sufficiently stated a claim 
against the landlord for violating a provisi on of this Chapter and provided sufficient 
evidence supporting the claim.  
i. If the Rent Control Office de termines that the Rent-Controlled Tenant has not 
sufficiently stated a claim, then the Re nt Control Office shall: (1) deny the 
complaint and stamp the complaint to indicate that it is denied,  and (2) provide 
a Notice of Denial to the Rent-Controlled Tenant explaining the reason(s) for 
the denial. 
ii. If the Rent Control Office determines that the Rent-Controlled Tenant has 
sufficiently stated a cla im, the Rent Control Office shall: (1) stamp the 
complaint to indicate that it is comple te, (2) set a hearing date for when the 
complaint will be considered by the Board, and (3) notify the Rent-Controlled 
Tenant and the landlord of the complaint’s complete and proper status by 
providing the Rent-Controlled Tenant w ith an exact copy of the stamped 
complete complaint and by providing th e landlord with an exact copy of both 
the stamped complete complaint and a Notice of Complaint and Hearing that 
has the hearing date indicated therein and includes language  indicating to the 
landlord that they have a right to file an opposition to the complaint. 
d. Opposition to the Application. No later than twenty (20) days prior to the hearing date, 
the landlord must submit written opposition, including c opies of any and all supporting 
documentation, if any, to the Rent Control O ffice for the Board’s consideration at the 
hearing. The Rent Control Office will make the written opposition available to the Rent-
Controlled Tenant for copying and inspection. 
e. List of Witnesses. No later than fourteen ( 14) days prior to the hearing date, both the 
landlord and the Rent-Controlled Tenant must provide the Rent Control Office with a list 
of all witnesses they plan to have testify at  the hearing, if any. Th e Rent Control Office 
will make the landlord’s and Rent-Controlled Tenant’s list of witnesses available for 
copying and inspection. 
f. Hearing. At the hearing, the Board shall gi ve both the landlord and the Rent-Controlled 
Tenant an opportunity to present their case , which shall consist of presenting evidence, 
calling witnesses, and the like. No submissi ons or evidence will be considered by the 
Board other than those provided to the Re nt Control Office in accordance with 
Subsections d and e above. The only exception to this rule is when the Board, itself, 
requests specific additional submissions or evidence in order to reach a decision on the 
matter, which then, in order to be considered by the Board, must be provided to the Rent 
Control Office as directed by the Board. 
g. Decision by Board. Within sixty (60) days  of the completion of a hearing for the 
complaint, the Board shall determine whether to approve or deny the complaint, enact a 

 
20 
 
Resolution accordingly, and issue a written Opinion, if necessary. If the Board determines 
that the landlord imposed an  invalid rent increase or surcharge on the Rent-Controlled 
Tenant, the Board shall deem th at rent increase or surcharg e void and order a refund to 
that particular tenant in accordance with any terms and deadline set by the Board. Where 
the evidence at the hearing establishes that the landlord has imposed a similar invalid rent 
increase or surcharge on other similarly situated Rent-Controlled Tenants in the Dwelling, 
the Board may find that the la ndlord must also issue a ref und to the similarly situated 
Rent-Controlled Tenants in accordance with any appropriate terms and deadline the 
Board’s determines, which shall then be included in the Board’s Resolution and Opinion, 
if any.  
h. Notice to Rent-Controlled Tenant and Landlord of Board’s Decision. After the Board has 
passed a Resolution determining the matter, the Rent Control Office shall notify the Rent-
Controlled Tenant and the landlord of the Board’s Decision by providing both the landlord 
and the Rent-Controlled Tenant with exact copies of: (1) the Board’s Resolution, and 
Opinion, if any, (2) the Complaint stamped to indicate that it is approved or denied, and 
(3) a Notice of Approved, or Denied, Complaint.  
 
§ 16-6.3. Sua Sponte Review of Invalid Rent Increase or Surcharge. 
In the absence of the filing of a complaint pursuant to Section 16-6.2 above, upon receipt of 
reasonable evidence that a landlord has imposed an  invalid rent increase or invalid surcharge, 
the Board may, within the purpose of this Chapter, bring its own Complaint against a landlord 
to determine the validity of such rent increase or surcharge, in which case the provisions and 
procedures of Section 16-6.2 (c) through (h) shall govern th e manner for adjudicating the 
complaint. 
 
§ 16-7. COMPLAINT ALLEGING LANDLORD HAS FAILED TO PAY MONEY OWED 
ACCORDING TO A BOARD DECISION 
a. Filing a Complaint. Where the landlord has not refunded money due or payable to a Rent-
Controlled Tenant(s) accordi ng to a Resolution or written Opinion of the Board, the 
aggrieved Rent-Controlled Tenant(s) shall be permitted to file a complaint with the Board 
for the purpose of conducting a hearing to determine whether the landlord is in default of 
any the deadlines or terms set forth in the Resolution or Opinion.  
b. Rent Control Office Review. Once the compla int has been filed with the Rent Control 
Office, the Rent Control Office shall deter mine whether the complaint is complete and 
proper, meaning whether the Rent-Controlled Tenant has provided sufficient evidence 
supporting their claim that their landlord ha s failed to pay money owed according to a 
Board Decision.  
i. If the Rent Control Office determines that the Rent-Controlled Tenant has 
not sufficiently stated a claim, then the Rent Control Office will outright 
deny the Rent-Controlled Tenant co mplaint and provide a Notice of 
Denial to the Rent-Contro lled Tenant explaining  the reason(s) for the 
denial. 
ii. If the Rent Control Office determines that the Rent-Controlled Tenant has 
sufficiently stated a claim, the Rent  Control Office shall: (1) stamp the 
complaint to indicate that it is comp lete, (2) set a hearing date for when 
the complaint will be considered by the Board, and (3) notify the Rent-
Controlled Tenant of the complain t’s complete and proper status by 

 
21 
 
providing the Rent-Controlled Tenant with an exact copy of the stamped 
complete complaint and by providing the landlord with an exact copy of 
both the stamped complete complaint and a Notice of Complaint that has 
the hearing date indicated therein and includes language indicating to the 
landlord that they have a right to file an opposition to the complaint. 
c. Opposition to the Application. No later than twenty (20) days prior to the hearing date, 
the landlord must submit written opposition, including c opies of any and all supporting 
documentation, if any, to the Rent Control O ffice for the Board’s consideration at the 
hearing. The Rent Control Office will ma ke the written opposition available to the 
complainant for copying and inspection. 
d. List of Witnesses. No later than fourteen ( 14) days prior to the hearing date, both the 
landlord and the Rent-Controlled Tenant must provide the Rent Control Office with a list 
of all witnesses they plan to have testify at  the hearing, if any. Th e Rent Control Office 
will make the landlord’s and complainant’s list of witnesses available for copying and 
inspection. 
e. Hearing. At the hearing, the Board shall gi ve both the landlord and the Rent-Controlled 
Tenant an opportunity to present their case , which shall consist of presenting evidence, 
calling witnesses, and the like. No submissi ons or evidence will be considered by the 
Board other than those provided to the Re nt Control Office in accordance with 
Subsections c and d above. The only exception to this rule is when the Board, itself, 
requests specific additional submissions or evidence in order to reach a decision on the 
matter, which then, in order to be considered by the Board, must be provided to the Rent 
Control Office as directed by the Board. 
f. Decision by Board. Within sixty (60) days  of the completion of a hearing for the 
complaint, the Board shall determine whether to approve or deny the complaint, enact a 
Resolution accordingly, and issue a written Opinion, if necessary. If the Board determines 
that  the landlord owes the Rent-Controlled Tenant money according to a Board Decision, 
then the Board shall approve the complaint. If the Board determines that the landlord has 
paid all money owed to the Rent-Controlled  Tenant, then the Board shall deny the 
complaint. 
g. Notice to Complainant and Landlord of Boar d’s Decision. After the Board has passed a 
Resolution determining the matter, the Re nt Control Office shall notify the Rent-
Controlled Tenant and the landlord of the Board’s Decision by providing the landlord and 
Rent-Controlled Tenant with exact copies of: (1) the Board’s Resolution, and Opinion, if 
any, (2) the complaint stamped to indicate that it is approved or denied, and (3) a Notice 
of Approved, or Denied, Complaint. 
 
§ 16-8. RENT REDUCTIONS BASED ON ELIMINATION OF CORE SERVICES 
a. Application. Any Rent-Controlled Tenant may apply to the Board for a decrease in Base 
Rent based on the material reduction, or elimination, of a Core Service by submitting an 
Application for Rent Reduction with the Rent Control Office, which identifies the Core 
Service that the Rent-Controlled Tenant co ntends has been mate rially reduced or 
eliminated, explains why and how the Core Service has been materially reduced or 
eliminated, and identifies the amount of rental decrease the Re nt-Controlled Tenant 
contends is appropriate. An Application for Rent Reduction must be filed with the Rent 
Control no later than eighteen  (18) months after the landl ord materially reduces or 
eliminates the Core Service. All documenta tion that the Rent-Control Tenant intends to 

 
22 
 
rely upon in support of the Application for Rent Reduction must be filed with the 
Application for Rent Reduction. No documentation in support of the Application for Rent 
Reduction will be considered by the Board if it has not been submitted with the 
Application for Rent Reduction or is not submitted to the Rent Control Office before the 
Rent Control Office issues a Notice of Completed Application for and Hearing pursuant 
to subsection c. 
b. Failure to File a Timely Application. Failure  to file an Applica tion for Rent Reduction 
within eighteen (18) months after the landlord materially reduces or eliminates the Core 
Service shall be deemed to mean that the Re nt-Controlled Tenant agrees to the material 
reduction, or elimination, of that particular Core Service. As a result, the Board may find 
that a Rent-Controlled Tenant is barred from  filing an Application for Rent Reduction, 
and is deemed to have waived the right to ob ject to the reduction or elimination of that 
particular Core Service, absent a showi ng by the Rent-Controlled Tenant of reasonable 
excuse for failing to timely file an Application for Rent Reduction. So long as the Rent-
Controlled Tenant files an Application for Rent Reduction within eighteen-months of the 
date that the landlord materially reduces or eliminates the Core Service, any Base Rent 
payments made by the Rent-Controlled Tenant to the landlord within the eighteen-month 
period shall not be construed to be an agr eement by the Rent-Controlled Tenant to the 
reduction or elimination of the Core Service or a waiver of their right to file an 
Application for Rent Reduction based on the material reducti on, or elimination, of that 
particular Core Service. 
c. Rent Control Office Review. The Rent Contro l Office shall review  the Application for 
Rent Reduction to determine if the applica tion is complete and proper. Once the Rent 
Control Office has determined that the App lication for Rent Reduction is complete and 
proper, the Rent Control Office shall: (1) stam p the application to indicate that it is 
complete, (2) set a hearing date for when the Application for Rent Reduction will be 
considered by the Board, and (3) notify the Rent-Controlled Tenant and the landlord of 
the application’s complete and proper stat us by providing the Re nt-Controlled Tenant 
with an exact copy of the stamped comple te Application for Rent Reduction and by 
providing the landlord with an exact copy of both the stamped complete Application for 
Rent Reduction and a Notice of Completed Application and Hearing that has the hearing 
date indicated therein and includes language indi cating to the landlord  that they have a 
right to file an opposition to the Application for Rent Reduction.  
d. Opposition to the Application. No later than twenty (20) days prior to the hearing date, 
the landlord must submit  written opposition, including any and all supporting 
documentation, if any, to the Rent Control O ffice for the Board’s consideration at the 
hearing. The Rent Control Office will make the written opposition available to the Rent-
Controlled Tenant for copying and inspection. 
e. List of Witnesses. No later than fourteen ( 14) days prior to the hearing date, both the 
landlord and the Rent-Controlled Tenant must provide the Rent Control Office with a list 
of all witnesses they plan to have testify at  the hearing, if any. Th e Rent Control Office 
will make the landlord’s and Rent-Controlled Tenant’s list of witnesses available for 
copying and inspection. 
f. Hearing. At the hearing, the Board shall gi ve both the landlord and the Rent-Controlled 
Tenant an opportunity to present their case , which shall consist of presenting evidence, 
calling witnesses, and the like. No submissi ons or evidence will be considered by the 
Board other than those provided to the Re nt Control Office in accordance with 

 
23 
 
Subsections d and e above. The only exception to this rule is when the Board, itself, 
requests specific additional submissions or evidence in order to reach a decision on the 
matter, which then, in order to be considered by the Board, must be provided to the Rent 
Control Office as directed by the Board. 
g. The Board’s Decision. Within si xty (60) days of the comp letion of a hearing for the 
Application for Rent Reduction, the Board sh all determine whether to approve or deny 
the Application for Rent Reduction, enact a Resolution accordingly, and issue a written 
Opinion, if necessary. If the Board determines that there has been a material reduction 
or elimination in Core Services former ly provided by the landlord, the Board shall 
equitably reduce the Rent-Contro lled Tenant’s Base Rent to  reflect such reduction or 
elimination, accounting for any adjustments due to CPI Increases that were approved 
after the landlord materially reduced or eliminated the Core Services. Where the evidence 
at the hearing establishes that the landlord has imposed a similar reduction or elimination 
in Core Services on other similarly situated Rent-Controlled Tenants in the Dwelling, the 
Board may find that the landlord must also issue a refund to the similarly situated Rent-
Controlled Tenants in accordance with any appropriate terms and deadline the Board’s 
determines, which shall then be included in the Board’s Resolution and Opinion, if any. 
Any rental reduction shall take effect from the date the Resolution is passed by the Board. 
If the Board’s Resolution is retroactive, then the landlord shall refund to the Rent-
Controlled Tenant(s) any amounts the landl ord was not authorized to collect. The 
approved rent reduction shall be deemed to  be the new Base Rent, including, but not 
limited to, for purposes of subsequent rent increases.  
h. Notice to Rent-Controlled Tenant and Landlord of Board’s Decision. After the Board has 
passed a Resolution determining the matter, the Rent Control Office shall notify the Rent-
Controlled Tenant and the landlord of the Board’s Decision and provide the landlord and 
the Rent-Controlled Tenant with exact co pies of: (1) the Board’s Resolution, and 
Opinion, if any, (2) the Application for Rent  Reduction stamped to indicate that it is 
approved, or denied, and (3) a Notice of Approved, or Denied, Application.   
 
§ 16-9. PERMANENT DECONTROL 
a. Permanent Decontrol. A Covered Rental Unit may become forever decontrolled and no 
longer subject to the rental constraints of this Chapter as result of the voluntary vacancy 
or legal eviction of a Rent-Controlled Te nant from a Covered Rental Unit. Once a 
Covered Rental Unit becomes decontrolled, th e tenant that used to occupy the unit is 
deemed to be a former Rent-Controlled Tenant. 
b. Application. In order to obt ain the Permanent Decontrol of  a Covered Rental Unit, a 
landlord must apply to the Board by submitting an Application for Permanent Decontrol 
to the Rent Control Office. In the Applic ation for Permanent Decontrol, the landlord 
must provide the Board with proof of the v acancy. In the case of a voluntary vacancy, 
the landlord shall supply an affidavit from ei ther the formerly vacated Rent-Controlled 
Tenant, the superintendent, the landlord, or the new tenant, attesting that the former 
tenant has vacated the Covered Rental Un it, or other proof that the Board deems 
sufficient to establish with a reasonable degr ee of certainty that the formerly vacated 
Rent-Controlled Tenant has permanently vaca ted the Covered Rental Unit. In the case 
of a legal eviction, the landlor d shall supply the Board with  a copy of the Court Order 
or other legal decree of the Court evicting the Rent-Controlled Tenant from the Covered 
Rental Unit. No documentation in support of  the Application for Permanent Decontrol 
will be considered by the Board if it has not  been submitted by the landlord with the 
Application for Permanent Decontrol or is not submitted to the Rent Control Office 

 
24 
 
before the Rent Control Office issues a No tice of Completed Application and Hearing 
pursuant to subsection c. 
c. Rent Control Office Review. The Rent Contro l Office shall review  the Application for 
Permanent Decontrol to determine if the appl ication is complete and proper. Once the 
Rent Control Office has determined that th e Application for Permanent Decontrol is 
complete and proper, the Rent Control Office shall: (1) stamp the application to indicate 
that it is complete and (2) notify the landlor d of the application’s complete and proper 
status by providing the landlord with an exact copy of the stamped complete Application 
for Permanent Decontrol and a Notice of Completed Application that includes language 
indicating to the allegedly former   Rent-Controlled Tenant that  they have a right to file 
an opposition to the Applicati on for Permanent Decontrol and if they do not, that the 
Rental Unit will be deemed permanently decontrolled. 
d. Notice to Vacated Tenant of Application. Wi thin ten (10) days after receipt by the 
landlord of the stamped complete copy of the Application Permanent Decontrol and 
Notice of Completed Application, the landlord shall provide the allegedly former Rent-
Controlled Tenant with exact copies of both by registered or certified mail return receipt 
requested or by personal servi ce with a sworn affidavit of service. In the event the 
landlord cannot reasonably locate  the allegedly former Rent -Controlled Tenant, or the 
post-office cannot obtain the signature of the tenant on the return receipt, the landlord 
shall send the notice by regular mail to the te nant’s last known address and set forth on 
their Notice Log the reasons why the landlord had to use regular mail. 
e. Informing the Rent Control Office that Tenant Notice Has Been Given. After notice has 
been given by the landlord to the allegedly former Rent-Controlled Tenant pursuant to 
Subsection d above, the landlord shall provide the Rent Control Office with a Notice Log 
to confirm that the notice required by Subsection d above has been sent to the allegedly 
former Rent-Controlled Tenant. The landlord must provide the Rent Control Office with 
this Notice Log within forty (40) days af ter landlord receives th e stamped complete 
Application and the Notice of Application. 
f. Opposition to the Application. No later than fourteen days after being given notice shall 
Tenant file an opposition to landlord’s Application for Permanent Decontrol. 
g. The Office’s Decision. If, by the time that th e Rent Control Office  receives Landlord’s 
Notice Log pursuant to section e above and the allegedly former Rent-Controlled Tenant 
fails to submit opposition to landlord’s Appl ication for Permanent Decontrol, the Rent 
Control Office shall approve landlord’s Application for Permanent Decontrol so long as 
landlord has supplied the Offi ce with the appropr iate documentatio n in support of 
landlord’s application.  
h. Notice of Rent Control Office’s Decision. Af ter the Rent Control has determined the 
matter, the Rent Control Office shall notify the landlord, and the tenant where opposition 
has been received pursuant to subsection f above, of the Rent Control Office’s Decision 
on the Application for Perman ent Decontrol by providing th e landlord, and the tenant 
where opposition has been received pursuant to section f above, with exact copies of: (1) 
the Application for Permanent Decontrol stam ped to indicate that it is approved, or 
denied, and (2) a Notice of Approval, or Denial. 
i. When Rental Unit Becomes Permanently Deco ntrol. The day that the Rent Control 
Office approves of the Application for Permanent Decontrol is when the Rental Unit is 
decontrolled. 
 
§ 16-10. APPLICATION SEEKING EXEM PTION FROM CHAPTER 16 RENT 
CONTROL 

 
25 
 
a. Application. Where a landlord reasonably beli eves that the landlord’s property is being 
treated as a Dwelling rather than an Exempt Dwelling, or that a unit within an Exempt 
Dwelling is being treated as a Covered Rental Unit rather than an Exempt Rental Unit, 
the Landlord shall be permitted to file an Application for Exemption with the Board for 
the purpose of conducting a hearing to determine whether the dwelling or the unit should 
be deemed exempt from this Chapter.  
b. Rent Control Office Review. The Rent Contro l Office shall review the Application for 
Exemption to determine if the application is complete and proper. Once the Rent Control 
Office has determined that the Application for Exemption is comp lete and proper, the 
Rent Control Office shall: (1) stamp the application to indicate that it is complete, (2) set 
a hearing date for when the Application for Exemption will be considered by the Board, 
and (3) notify the Rent-Controlled Tenant(s ) and the landlord of the application’s 
complete and proper status by providing the Landlord  with an exact copy of the stamped 
complete Application for Exemption and by providing the Rent-Controlled Tenant(s) 
with an exact copy of both the stamped complete Application for Exemption and a Notice 
of Completed Application and Hearing that has the hearing date indicated therein and 
includes language indicating to  the Rent-Controlled Tenant(s) that they have a right to 
file an opposition to the Application for Exemption.  
c. Opposition to the Application. No later than twenty (20) days prior to the hearing date, 
the Rent-Controlled Tenant(s) must sub mit written opposition, including any and all 
supporting documentation, if any, to the Rent Control Office for the Board’s 
consideration at the hearing. The Rent Cont rol Office will make the written opposition 
available to the Rent-Controlled Tenant(s) for copying and inspection. 
d. List of Witnesses. No later than fourteen ( 14) days prior to the hearing date, both the 
landlord and the Rent-Controlled Tenant(s) must provide the Rent Control Office with a 
list of all witnesses they plan to have tes tify at the hearing, if any. The Rent Control 
Office will make the landlord’s and Rent-Controlled Tenant’s list of witnesses available 
for copying and inspection. 
e. Hearing. At the hearing, the Board shall gi ve both the landlord and the Rent-Controlled 
Tenant(s) an opportunity to present their case, which shall consist of presenting evidence, 
calling witnesses, and the like. No submissi ons or evidence will be considered by the 
Board other than those provided to the Re nt Control Office in accordance with 
Subsections c and d above. The only exception to this rule is when the Board, itself, 
requests specific additional submissions or evidence in order to reach a decision on the 
matter, which then, in order to be considered by the Board, must be provided to the Rent 
Control Office as directed by the Board. 
f. The Board’s Decision. Within si xty (60) days of the comp letion of a hearing for the 
Application for Exemption, the Board shall determine whether to approve or deny the 
Application for Exemption, enact a Resoluti on accordingly, and issue an Opinion, if 
necessary. If the Board determines that th e landlord’s property s hould be exempt from 
the provisions of this Chapter, then the Bo ard shall either permanently or temporarily 
approve the Application for Exemption. If th e Board determines th at the landlord’s 
property is not exempt from the provisions of this Chapter, then the Board shall deny the 
Application for Exemption.  
g. Notice to Rent-Controlled Tenant(s) and Landlord of Board’s Decision. After the Board 
has passed a Resolution determining the matter, the Rent Control Office shall notify the 
Rent-Controlled Tenant(s) and the landlord of the Board’s Decision by providing the 

 
26 
 
Rent-Controlled Tenant and the landlord with exact copies of: (1) the Board’s Resolution, 
and Opinion, if any, (2) the Application for Exemption stamped to indicate that it is 
approved, or denied, and (3) a Notice of Approved, or Denied, Application.   
 
§ 16-11. COMPLAINT SEEKING A DETERMI NATION THAT AN I NDIVIDUAL IS A 
RENT-CONTROLLED TENANT 
a. Filing a Complaint. Where an individual re asonably believes that they are a Rent-
Controlled Tenant but have been treated as a tenant not subject to the provisions of this 
Chapter by either their landlord and/or the Rent Control Office/B oard, the individual 
shall be permitted to file a complaint w ith the Board for the purpose of conducting a 
hearing to determine whether the individual is a Rent-Controlled Tenant.  
b. Rent Control Office Review. Once the compla int has been filed with the Rent Control 
Office, the Rent Control Office shall deter mine whether the complaint is complete and 
proper, meaning whether the complainant has provided sufficient evidence supporting 
the claim that they are a Rent-Controlled Tenant.  
i. If the Rent Control Office determin es that the complainant has not 
sufficiently stated a claim, then the Rent Control Office will outright deny 
the complainant’s complaint and provide a Notice of Denial to the 
complainant explaining the reason(s) for the denial. 
ii. If the Rent Control Office determines that the complainant has sufficiently 
stated a claim, the Rent Control Offi ce shall: (1) stamp the complaint to 
indicate that it is complete, (2) set a hearing date for when the complaint 
will be considered by the Board, and (3) notify the complainant of the 
complaint’s complete and proper status by providing the complainant with 
an exact copy of the stamped comp lete complaint and by providing the 
landlord with an exact copy of both the stamped complete complaint and 
a Notice of Complaint that has the hearing date indicated therein and 
includes language indicating to the landlord that they  have a right to file 
an opposition to the complaint. 
c. Opposition to the Application. No later than twenty (20) days prior to the hearing date, 
the landlord must submit written opposition, including c opies of any and all supporting 
documentation, if any, to the Rent Control O ffice for the Board’s consideration at the 
hearing. The Rent Control Office will ma ke the written opposition available to the 
complainant for copying and inspection. 
d. List of Witnesses. No later than fourteen ( 14) days prior to the hearing date, both the 
landlord and the complainant mu st provide the Rent Control Office with a list of all 
witnesses they plan to have testify at the hearing, if any. The Rent Control Office will 
make the landlord’s and comp lainant’s list of witnesse s available for copying and 
inspection. 
e. Hearing. At the hearing, the Board shall give  both the landlord and the complainant an 
opportunity to present their case, which sh all consist of presenting evidence, calling 
witnesses, and the like. No submissions or evidence will be considered by the Board other 
than those provided to the Rent Control Office in accordance with Subsections c and d 
above. The only exception to this rule is when the Board, itself,  requests specific 
additional submissions or evidence in order to reach a decision on the matter, which then, 
in order to be considered by the Board, must be provided to the Rent Control Office as 
directed by the Board. 

 
27 
 
f. Decision by Board. Within sixty (60) days  of the completion of a hearing for the 
complaint, the Board shall determine whether to approve or deny the complaint, enact a 
Resolution accordingly, and issu e an Opinion, if necessary. If the Board determines that  the 
complainant should be considered a Rent-Controlled Tenant, then the Board shall approve 
the complaint. If the Board determines that the complainant is not a Rent-Controlled 
Tenant, then the Board shall deny the complaint. 
g. Notice to Complainant and Landlord of Boar d’s Decision. After the Board has passed a 
Resolution determining the matter, the Rent Control Office shall notify the complainant 
and the landlord of the Boar d’s Decision by providing the complainant and the landlord 
with exact copies of: (1) the Board’s Resolu tion, and Opinion, if any, (2) the complaint 
stamped to indicate that it is approved or denied, and (3) a Notice of Approved, or Denied, 
Complaint. 
 
§ 16-12. APPEALS 
All decisions of the Board and the Rent Control Office are final. Any landlord or Rent-Controlled 
Tenant wishing to appeal the decisions may do so to a court of competent jurisdiction according 
to law pursuant to its rules and procedures. 
 
§ 16-13. FILING FEES 
a. There is hereby established the following schedule of fees for complaints and 
applications to the Board which fees shall be payable to the City of Bayonne. 
 
Applications Submitted by Landlord 
Use  Fee  
Application for CPI Increase $50 fo r 1-10 Covered Rental Units, 
$100 for more than 10 Covered 
Rental Units 
Application for Hardship Surcharge $100 per Application  
Application for Major Capital Improvement 
Surchar
ge 
$100 per Application 
Application for Individual Rental Unit 
Improvement 
$50 per Application 
Application for Permanent Decontrol $25 per Rental Unit 
Application Seeking Exemption from Chapter 
16 Rent Control 
$25 per Rental Unit 
 
 
Applications/Complaints Submitted by Rent-Controlled Tenant 
Use Fee 
Complaint for an Invalid Rent Increase or 
Invalid Surcharges  
$25 per Application 
Complaint for Failure to Collect on the 
Board’s Decision 
$5 per Application 
Application for Rent Reduction $25 per Applicatio n 
 Complaint Seeking a Determination that an 
Individual is a Rent-Controlled Tenant 
$25 per Application 
 
 

 
28 
 
b. Where one of the applications/complaints submitted by a Rent-Cont rolled Tenant listed 
in subsection a is resolved by the Board in  favor of the Rent-C ontrolled Tenant, the 
application/complaint fee paid by the Rent-C ontrolled Tenant for the matter shall be 
assessed against the landlord as part of the relief granted by the Board in response to the 
matter. 
 
§ 16-14. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES 
a. No person shall engage in a reckless or in tentional violation of any provision of this 
Chapter. Such a reckless or intentional vi olation may be punishable by a fine of not 
more than $2,000. A violation af fecting more than one lease hold shall be considered a 
separate violation as to each leasehold. 
b. No person shall make, or cause to be made, any misstatement of fact in any application, 
complaint, or other submission, to the Rent Control Office or the Board, or at any hearing 
of the Board. Any such misstatement may be punishable by a fine of not more than $500 
per misstatement. 
c. No person or entity shall, by their wrongful actions of harassment or otherwise, cause, or 
attempt to cause, a Covered Rental Unit to become vacant and permanently decontrolled 
pursuant to Section 16-9. Any person or entity engaging in such wrongful actions may be 
punishable by a fine of not more than $2,000.  
 
§ 16-15. SEVERABILITY 
If any section, paragraph, clause, or provision of this Chapter is held invalid or unenforceable 
for any reason, the invalidity or unenforceability of such section, paragraph, clause or provision 
shall not affect any of the remaining provisions of this Chapter which shall remain valid and 
enforceable. 
 
Section II This ordinance shall take effect upon adoption and publication in accordance with 
the law. 
 
 
